To the Congress of the United States:

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress:

It is a great privilege to be here to outline a new budget and a new approach
for governing our great country. I thank you for your invitation to speak here
tonight. I want to thank so many of you who have accepted my invitation to come
to the White House to discuss important issues. We are off to a good start. I
will continue to meet with you and ask for your input. You have been kind and
candid, and I thank you for making a new President feel welcome.

The last time I visited the Capitol, I came to take an oath. On the steps of
this building, I pledged to honor our Constitution and laws, and I asked you to
join me in setting a tone of civility and respect in Washington. I hope America
is noticing the difference. We are making progress. Together, we are changing
the tone of our Nations capital. And this spirit of respect and cooperation is
vitalbecause in the end, we will be judged not only by what we say or how we
say it, but by what we are able to accomplish.

America today is a nation with great challengesbut greater resources. An artist
using statistics as a brush could paint two very different pictures of our
country. One would have warning signs: increasing layoffs, rising energy prices,
too many failing schools, persistent poverty, the stubborn vestiges of racism.
Another picture would be full of blessings: a balanced budget, big surpluses, a
military that is second to none, a country at peace with its neighbors,
technology that is revolutionizing the world, and our greatest strength,
concerned citizens who care for our country and for each other. Neither picture
is complete in and of itself. And tonight I challenge and invite Congress to
work with me to use the resources of one picture to repaint the otherto direct
the advantages of our time to solve the problems of our people.

Some of these resources will come from governmentsome, but not all. Year after
year in Washington, budget debates seem to come down to an old, tired argument:
on one side, those who want more government, regardless of the cost; on the
other, those who want less government, regardless of the need.

We should leave those arguments to the last century and chart a different
course. Government has a role, and an important one. Yet too much government
crowds out initiative and hard work, private charity and the private economy.
Our new governing vision says government should be active, but limited, engaged,
but not overbearing. My budget is based on that philosophy. It is reasonable and
it is responsible. It meets our obligations and funds our growing needs. We
increase spending next year for Social Security and Medicare and other
entitlement programs by $81 billion. We have increased spending for
discretionary programs by a very responsible 4 percent, above the rate of
inflation. My plan pays down an unprecedented amount of our national debt, and
then when money is still left over, my plan returns it to the people who earned
it in the first place.

A budgets impact is counted in dollars, but measured in lives. Excellent
schools, quality health care, a secure retirement, a cleaner environment, a
stronger defensethese are all important needs and we fund them.

The highest percentage increase in our budget should go to our childrens
education. Education is my top priority and by supporting this budget, you will
make it yours as well. Reading is the foundation of all learning, so during the
next 5 years, we triple spending, adding another $5 billion to help every child
in America learn to read. Values are important, so we have tripled funding for
character education to teach our children not only reading and writing, but
right from wrong.

We have increased funding to train and recruit teachers, because we know a good
education starts with a good teacher. And I have a wonderful partner in this
effort. I like teachers so much, I married one. Please help me salute our
gracious First Lady, Laura Bush.

Laura has begun a new effort to recruit Americans to the profession that will
shape our future: teaching. Laura will travel across America, to promote sound
teaching practices and early reading skills in our schools and in programs such
as Head Start.

When it comes to our schools, dollars alone do not always make the difference.
Funding is important, and so is reform. So we must tie funding to higher
standards and accountability for results.

I believe in local control of schools: we should not and we will not run our
public schools from Washington. Yet when the Federal Government spends tax
dollars, we must insist on results. Children should be tested on basic reading
and math skills every year, between grades three and eight. Measuring is the
only way to know whether all our children are learningand I want to know,
because I refuse to leave any child behind.

Critics of testing contend it distracts from learning. They talk about
teaching to the test. But let us put that logic to the test. If you test
children on basic math and reading skills, and you are teaching to the test,
you are teaching . . . math and reading. And that is the whole idea.

As standards rise, local schools will need more flexibility to meet them. So we
must streamline the dozens of Federal education programs into five and let
States spend money in those categories as they see fit.

Schools will be given a reasonable chance to improve, and the support to do so.
Yet if they do not, if they continue to fail, we must give parents and students
different optionsa better public school, a private school, tutoring, or a
charter school. In the end, every child in a bad situation must be given a
better choice, because when it comes to our children, failure is not an option.

Another priority in my budget is to keep the vital promises of Medicare and
Social Security, and together we will do so. To meet the health care needs of
all Americas seniors, we double the Medicare budget over the next 10 years.

My budget dedicates $238 billion to Medicare next year alone, enough to fund all
current programs and to begin a new prescription drug benefit for lowincome
seniors. No senior in America should have to choose between buying food and
buying prescriptions. To make sure the retirement savings of Americas seniors
are not diverted to any other programmy budget protects all $2.6 trillion of
the Social Security surplus for Social Security and for Social Security alone.

My budget puts a priority on access to health carewithout telling Americans
what doctor they have to see or what coverage they must choose. Many working
Americans do not have health care coverage. We will help them buy their own
insurance with refundable tax credits. And to provide quality care in low-income
neighborhoods, over the next 5 years we will double the number of people served
at community health care centers. And we will address the concerns of those who
have health coverage yet worry their insurance company does not care and will
not pay. Together, this Congress and this President will find common ground to
make sure doctors make medical decisions and patients get the health care they
deserve with a Patients Bill of Rights. When it comes to their health, people
want to get the medical care they need, not be forced to go to court because
they did not get it. We will ensure access to the courts for those with
legitimate claims, but first, let us put in place a strong independent review so
we promote quality health care, not frivolous lawsuits.

My budget also increases funding for medical research, which gives hope to many
who struggle with serious disease. Our prayers tonight are with one of your own
who is engaged in his own fight against cancer, a fine representative and a good
man, Congressman JOE MOAKLEY. God bless you, JOE. And I can think of no more
appropriate tribute to JOE than to have the Congress finish the job of doubling
the budget for the National Institutes of Health. My New Freedom Initiative for
Americans with Disabilities funds new technologies, expands opportunities to
work, and makes our society more welcoming. For the more than 50 million
Americans with disabilities, we must continue to break down barriers to
equality.

The budget I propose to you also supports the people who keep our country strong
and free, the men and women who serve in the United States military. I am
requesting $5.7 billion in increased military pay and benefits, and health care
and housing. Our men and women in uniform give America their best and we owe
them our support. Americas veterans honored their commitment to our country
through their military service. I will honor our commitment to them with a
billion dollar increase to ensure better access to quality care and faster
decisions on benefit claims.

My budget will improve our environment by accelerating the cleanup of toxic
Brownfields. And I propose we make a major investment in conservation by fully
funding the Land and Water Conservation Fund. Our National Parks have a special
place in our countrys life. Our parks are places of great natural beauty and
history. As good stewards, we must leave them better than we have found them, so
I propose providing $4.9 billion in resources over 5 years for the upkeep of
these national treasures.

And my budget adopts a hopeful new approach to help the poor and disadvantaged.
We must encourage and support the work of charities and faithbased and community
groups that offer help and love one person at a time. These groups are working
in every neighborhood in America, to fight homelessness and addiction and
domestic violence, to provide a hot meal or a mentor or a safe haven for our
children. Government should welcome these groups to apply for funds, not
discriminate against them.

Government cannot be replaced by charities or volunteers. And government should
not fund religious activities. But our Nations should support the good works of
these good people who are helping neighbors in need. So I am proposing allowing
all taxpayers, whether they itemize or not, to deduct their charitable
contributions. Estimates show this could encourage as much as $14 billion a year
in new charitable givingmoney that will save and change lives.

Our budget provides more than $700 million over the next 10 years for a Federal
Compassion Capital Fund with a focused and noble mission: to provide a mentor to
the more than 1 million children with a parent in prison, and to support other
local efforts to fight illiteracy, teen pregnancy, drug addiction, and other
difficult problems. With us tonight is the Mayor of Philadelphia. Please help me
welcome Mayor John Street. Mayor Street has encouraged faith-based and community
organizations to make a difference in Philadelphia and he has invited me to his
city this summer, to see compassion in action.

I am personally aware of just how effective the Mayor is. Mayor Street is a
Democrat. Let the record show that I lost his city. But some things are bigger
than politics. So I look forward to coming to your city to see your faithbased
programs in action.

As government promotes compassion, it also must promote justice. Too many of our
citizens have cause to doubt our Nations justice when the law points a finger
of suspicion at groups, instead of individuals. All our citizens are created
equal and must be treated equally. Earlier today I asked Attorney General
Ashcroft to develop specific recommendations to end racial profiling. It is
wrong. We must end it. In so doing, we will not hinder the work of our Nations
brave police officers. They protect us every day, often at great risk. But by
stopping the abuses of a few, we will add to the public confidence our police
officers earn and deserve.

My budget has funded a responsible increase in our ongoing operations, it has
funded our Nations important priorities, it has protected Social Security and
Medicare, and our surpluses are big enough that there is still money left over.

Many of you have talked about the need to pay down our national debt. I have
listened, and I agree.

My budget proposal pays down an unprecedented amount of public debt. We owe it
to our children and grandchildren to act now, and I hope you will join me to pay
down $2 trillion in debt during the next 10 years.

At the end of those 10 years, we will have paid down all the debt that is
available to retire. That is more debt repaid more quickly than has ever been
repaid by any nation at any time in history.

We should also prepare for the unexpected, for the uncertainties of the future.
We should approach our Nations budget as any prudent family would, with a
contingency fund for emergencies or additional spending needs.

For example, after a strategic review, we may need to increase defense spending,
we may need additional money for our farmers, or additional money to reform
Medicare. And so my budget sets aside almost a trillion dollars over 10 years
for additional needs . . . that is one trillion additional reasons you can feel
comfortable supporting this budget. We have increased our budget at a
responsible 4 percent, we have funded our priorities, we have paid down all the
available debt, we have prepared for contingenciesand we still have money left
over.

Yogi Berra once said: When you come to a fork in the road, take it. Now we
come to a fork in the road. We have two choices. Even though we have already met
our needs, we could spend the money on more and bigger government. That is the
road our Nation has traveled in recent years. Last year, government spending
shot up 8 percent. That is far more than our economy grew, far more than
personal income grew and far more than the rate of inflation. If you continue on
that road, you will spend the surplus and have to dip into Social Security to
pay other bills.

Unrestrained government spending is a dangerous road to deficits, so we must
take a different path. The other choice is to let the American people spend
their own money to meet their own needs, to fund their own priorities and pay
down their own debts. I hope you will join me and stand firmly on the side of
the people.

The growing surplus exists because taxes are too high and government is charging
more than it needs. The people of America have been overcharged and on their
behalf, I am here to ask for a refund.

Some say my tax plan is too big, others say it is too small. I respectfully
disagree. This tax relief is just right. I did not throw darts at a board to
come up with a number for tax relief. I did not take a poll, or develop an
arbitrary formula that might sound good. I looked at problems in the tax code
and calculated the cost to fix them. A tax rate of 15 percent is too high for
those who earn low wages, so we lowered the rate to 10 percent. No one should
pay more than a third of the money they earn in Federal income taxes, so we
lowered the top rate to 33 percent. This reform will be welcome relief for
Americas small businesses, which often pay taxes at the highest rate, and help
for small business means jobs for Americans.

We simplified the tax code by reducing the number of tax rates from the current
five rates to four lower ones: 10, 15, 25, and 33 percent. In my plan, no one is
targeted in or targeted out . . . every one who pays income taxes will get tax
relief.

Our government should not tax, and thereby discourage marriage, so we reduced
the marriage penalty. I want to help families rear and support their children,
so we doubled the child credit to $1,000 per child. It is not fair to tax the
same earnings twiceonce when you earn them, and again when you die, so we must
repeal the death tax. These changes add up to significant help. A typical family
with two children will save $1,600 a year on their Federal income taxes. Sixteen
hundred dollars may not sound like a lot to some, but it means a lot to many
families. Sixteen hundred dollars buys gas for two cars for an entire year, it
pays tuition for a year at a community college, it pays the average family
grocery bill for 3 months. That is real money.

With us tonight, representing many American families, are Steven and Josefina
Ramos. Please help me welcome them. The Ramoses are from Pennsylvania, but they
could be from any one of your districts. Steven is a network administrator for a
school district, Josefina is a Spanish teacher at a charter school, and they
have a 2-yearold daughter, Lianna. Steven and Josefina tell me they pay almost
$8,000 a year in Federal income taxes; my plan will same them more than $2,000.
Let me tell you what Steven says:

Two thousand dollars a year means a lot to my family. If we had this money, it
would help us reach our goal of paying off our personal debt in two years.
After that, Steven and Josefina want to start saving for Liannas college
education. Government should never stand in the way of families achieving their
dreams. The surplus is not the governments money, the surplus is the peoples
money.

For lower-income families, my tax relief plan restores basic fairness. Right
now, complicated tax rules punish hard work. A waitress supporting two children
on $25,000 a year can lose nearly half of every additional dollar she earns. Her
overtime, her hardest hours, are taxed at nearly 50 percent. This sends a
terrible message: You will never get ahead. But Americas message must be
different: We must honor hard work, never punish it.

With tax relief, overtime will no longer be overtax time for the waitress.
People with the smallest incomes will get the highest percentage reductions. And
millions of additional American families will be removed from the income tax
rolls entirely.

Tax relief is right and tax relief is urgent. The long economic expansion that
began almost 10 years ago is faltering. Lower interest rates will eventually
help, but we cannot assume they will do the job all by themselves. Forty years
ago and then twenty years ago, two Presidents, one Democrat and one Republican,
John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan, advocated tax cuts toin President Kennedys
wordsget this country moving again.

They knew then, what we must do now: To create economic growth and opportunity,
we must put money back into the hands of the people who buy goods and create
jobs.

We must act quickly. The Chairman of the Federal Reserve has testified before
Congress that tax cuts often come too late to stimulate economic recovery. So I
want to work with you to give our economy an important jump start by making tax
relief retroactive. We must act now because it is the right thing to do. We must
also act now because we have other things to do. We must show courage to
confront and resolve tough challenges: to restructure our Nations defenses, to
meet our growing need for energy, and to reform Medicare and Social Security.
America has a window of opportunity to extend and secure our present peace by
promoting a distinctly American internationalism. We will work with our allies
and friends to be a force for good and a champion of freedom. We will work for
free markets and free trade and freedom from oppression. Nations making progress
toward freedom will find America is their friend. We will promote our values,
and we will promote peace. And we need a strong military to keep the peace. But
our military was shaped to confront the challenges of the past. So I have asked
the Secretary of Defense to review Americas armed forces and prepare to
transform them to meet emerging threats. My budget makes a downpayment on the
research and development that will be required. Yet, in our broader
transformation effort, we must put strategy first, then spending. Our defense
vision will drive our defense budget, not the other way around. Our Nation also
needs a clear strategy to confront the threats of the 21st century, threats that
are more widespread and less certain. They range from terrorists who threaten
with bombs to tyrants and rogue nations intent on developing weapons of mass
destruction. To protect our own people, our allies and friends, we must develop
and we must deploy effective missile defenses.

And as we transform our military, we can discard Cold War relics, and reduce our
own nuclear forces to reflect todays needs.

A strong America is the worlds best hope for peace and freedom. Yet the cause
of freedom rests on more than our ability to defend ourselves and our allies.
Freedom is exported every day, as we ship goods and products that improve the
lives of millions of people. Free trade brings greater political and personal
freedom.

Each of the previous five Presidents has had the ability to negotiate
farreaching trade agreements. Tonight I ask you to give me the strong hand of
presidential trade promotion authority, and to do so quickly.

As we meet tonight, many citizens are struggling with the high costs of energy.
We have a serious energy problem that demands a national energy policy. The West
is confronting a major energy shortage that has resulted in high prices and
uncertainty. I have asked Federal agencies to work with California officials to
help speed construction of new energy sources. And I have directed Vice
President CHENEY, Commerce Secretary Evans, Energy Secretary Abraham, and other
senior members of my Administration to recommend a national energy policy.

Our energy demand outstrips our supply. We can produce more energy at home while
protecting our environment, and we must. We can produce more electricity to meet
demand, and we must. We can promote alternative energy sources and conservation,
and we must. America must become more energy independent.

Perhaps the biggest test of our foresight and courage will be reforming Medicare
and Social Security. Medicares finances are strained and its coverage is
outdated. Ninety-nine percent of employer-provided health plans offer some form
of prescription drug coverage . . . Medicare does not. The framework for reform
has been developed by Senators FRIST and BREAUX and Congressman THOMAS, and now,
it is time to act. Medicare must be modernized. And we must make sure that every
senior on Medicare can choose a health plan that offers prescription drugs.

Seven years from now, the baby boom generation will begin to claim Social
Security benefits. Everyone in this chamber knows that Social Security is not
prepared to fully fund their retirement. And we only have a couple of years to
get prepared. Without reform, this country will one day awaken to a stark
choice: either a drastic rise in payroll taxes, or a radical cut in retirement
benefits. There is a better way.

This spring I will form a presidential commission to reform Social Security. The
commission will make its recommendations by next fall. Reform should be based on
these principles: It must preserve the benefits of all current retirees and
those nearing retirement. It must return Social Security to sound financial
footing. And it must offer personal savings accounts to younger workers who want
them. Social Security now offers workers a return of less than 2 percent on the
money they pay into the system. To save the system, we must increase that by
allowing younger workers to make safe, sound investments at a higher rate of
return.

Ownership, access to wealth, and independence should not be the privilege of a
few. They are the hope of every American . . . and we must make them the
foundation of Social Security. By confronting the tough challenge of reform, by
being responsible with our budget, we can earn the trust of the American people.
And, we can add to that trust by enacting fair and balanced election and
campaign finance reforms.

The agenda I have set before you tonight is worthy of a great country. America
is a nation at peace, but not a nation at rest. Much has been given to us, and
much is expected. Let us agree to bridge old divides. But let us also agree that
our good will must be dedicated to great goals. Bipartisanship is more than
minding our manners, it is doing our duty. No one can speak in this Capitol and
not be awed by its history. At so many turning points, debates in these chambers
have reflected the collected or divided conscience of our country. And when we
walk through Statuary Hall, and see those men and women of marble, we are
reminded of their courage and achievement.

Yet Americas purpose is never found in statues or history. Americas purpose
always stands before us. Our generation must show courage in a time of blessing,
as our Nation has always shown in times of crisis. And our courage issue by
issue, can gather to greatness, and serve our country. This is the privilege,
and responsibility, we share. And if we work together, we can prove that public
service is noble.

We all came here for a reason. We all have things we want to accomplish, and
promises to keep. Juntos podemos, together we can. We can make Americans proud
of their government. Together we can share in the credit of making our country
more prosperous and generous and justand earn from our conscience and from our
fellow citizens, the highest possible praise: well done, good and faithful
servants.

Thank you. Good night. And God Bless America.

To the Congress of the United States:

Mr. Speaker, Mr. President pro tempore, Members of Congress, and fellow
Americans:

In the normal course of events, Presidents come to this chamber to report on the
state of the Union. Tonight, no such report is needed. It has already been
delivered by the American people.

We have seen it in the courage of passengers, who rushed terrorists to save
others on the groundpassengers like an exceptional man named Todd Beamer.
Please help me to welcome his wife, Lisa Beamer, here tonight.

We have seen the state of our Union in the endurance of rescuers, working past
exhaustion. We have seen the unfurling of flags, the lighting of candles, the
giving of blood, the saying of prayersin English, Hebrew, and Arabic.

We have seen the decency of a loving and giving people, who have made the grief
of strangers their own.

My fellow citizens, for the last nine days, the entire world has seen for itself
the state of our Unionand it is strong.

Tonight we are a country awakened to danger and called to defend freedom. Our
grief has turned to anger, and anger to resolution. Whether we bring our enemies
to justice, or bring justice to our enemies, justice will be done. I thank the
Congress for its leadership at such an important time. All of America was
touched on the evening of the tragedy to see Republicans and Democrats, joined
together on the steps of this Capitol, singing God Bless America. And you
did more than sing, you acted, by delivering forty billion dollars to rebuild
our communities and meet the needs of our military.

Speaker Hastert and Minority Leader Gephardt, Majority Leader Daschle, and
Senator Lott, I thank you for your friendship and your leadership and your
service to our country. And on behalf of the American people, I thank the world
for its outpouring of support. America will never forget the sounds of our
National Anthem playing at Buckingham Palace, and on the streets of Paris, and
at Berlins Brandenburg Gate. We will not forget South Korean children gathering
to pray outside our embassy in Seoul, or the prayers of sympathy offered at a
mosque in Cairo. We will not forget moments of silence and days of mourning in
Australia and Africa and Latin America.

Nor will we forget the citizens of eighty other nations who died with our own.
Dozens of Pakistanis. More than 130 Israelis. More than 250 citizens of India.
Men and women from El Salvador, Iran, Mexico, and Japan. And hundreds of British
citizens. America has no truer friend than Great Britain. Once again, we are
joined together in a great cause. The British Prime Minister has crossed an
ocean to show his unity of purpose with America, and tonight we welcome Tony
Blair.

On September the eleventh, enemies of freedom committed an act of war against
our country. Americans have known warsbut for the past 136 years, they have
been wars on foreign soil, except for one Sunday in 1941. Americans have known
the casualties of warbut not at the center of a great city on a peaceful
morning. Americans have known surprise attacksbut never before on thousands of
civilians. All of this was brought upon us in a single dayand night fell on a
different world, a world where freedom itself is under attack.

Americans have many questions tonight. Americans are asking: Who attacked our
country?

The evidence we have gathered all points to a collection of loosely affiliated
terrorist organizations known as al-Qaida. They are the same murderers indicted
for bombing American embassies in Tanzania and Kenya, and responsible for the
bombing of the U.S.S. Cole.

Al-Qaida is to terror what the mafia is to crime. But its goal is not making
money; its goal is remaking the worldand imposing its radical beliefs on people
everywhere.

The terrorists practice a fringe form of Islamic extremism that has been
rejected by Muslim scholars and the vast majority of Muslim clericsa fringe
movement that perverts the peaceful teachings of Islam. The terrorists
directive commands them to kill Christians and Jews, to kill all Americans, and
make no distinctions among military and civilians, including women and children.

This group and its leadersa person named Usama bin Ladinare linked to many
other organizations in different countries, including the Egyptian Islamic Jihad
and the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan.

There are thousands of these terrorists in more than sixty countries. They are
recruited from their own nations and neighborhoods, and brought to camps in
places like Afghanistan where they are trained in the tactics of terror. They
are sent back to their homes or sent to hide in countries around the world to
plot evil and destruction.

The leadership of al-Qaida has great influence in Afghanistan, and supports the
Taliban regime in controlling most of that country. In Afghanistan, we see
al-Qaidas vision for the world. Afghanistans people have been brutalized many
are starving and many have fled. Women are not allowed to attend school. You can
be jailed for owning a television. Religion can be practiced only as their
leaders dictate. A man can be jailed in Afghanistan if his beard is not long
enough.

The United States respects the people of Afghanistanafter all, we are currently
its largest source of humanitarian aidbut we condemn the Taliban regime. It is
not only repressing its own people, it is threatening people everywhere by
sponsoring and sheltering and supplying terrorists. By aiding and abetting
murder, the Taliban regime is committing murder. And tonight, the United States
of America makes the following demands on the Taliban:

Deliver to United States authorities all the leaders of al-Qaida who hide in
your land.

Release all foreign nationalsincluding American citizensyou have unjustly
imprisoned, and protect foreign journalists, diplomats, and aid workers in your
country.

Close immediately and permanently every terrorist training camp in Afghanistan
and hand over every terrorist, and every person in their support structure, to
appropriate authorities. Give the United States full access to terrorist
training camps, so we can make sure they are no longer operating. These demands
are not open to negotiation or discussion. The Taliban must act and act
immediately. They will hand over the terrorists, or they will share in their
fate.

I also want to speak tonight directly to Muslims throughout the world: We
respect your faith. It is practiced freely by many millions of Americans, and by
millions more in countries that America counts as friends. Its teachings are
good and peaceful, and those who commit evil in the name of Allah blaspheme the
name of Allah. The terrorists are traitors to their own faith, trying, in
effect, to hijack Islam itself.

The enemy of America is not our many Muslim friends; it is not our many Arab
friends. Our enemy is a radical network of terrorists, and every government that
supports them.

Our war on terror with al-Qaida, but it does not end there. It will not end
until every terrorist group of global reach has been found, stopped, and
defeated. Americans are asking: Why do they hate us?

They hate what we see right here in this chambera democratically elected
government. Their leaders are self-appointed. They hate our freedomsour freedom
of religion, our freedom of speech, our freedom to vote and assemble and
disagree with each other. They want to overthrow existing governments in many
Muslim countries, such as Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Jordan. They want to drive
Israel out of the Middle East. They want to drive Christians and Jews out of
vast regions of Asia and Africa.

These terrorists kill not merely to end lives, but to disrupt and end a way of
life. With every atrocity, they hope that America grows fearful, retreating from
the world and forsaking our friends. They stand against us, because we stand in
their way.

We are not deceived by their pretenses to piety. We have seen their kind before.
They are the heirs of all the murderous ideologies of the twentieth century. By
sacrificing human life to serve their radical visionsby abandoning every value
except the will to powerthey follow in the path of fascism, and Nazism, and
totalitarianism. And they will follow that path all the way, to where it ends:
in historys unmarked grave of discarded lies.

Americans are asking: How will we fight and win this war?

We will direct every resource at our commandevery means of diplomacy, every
tool of intelligence, every instrument of law enforcement, every financial
influence, and every necessary weapon of warto the disruption and defeat of the
global terror network. This war will not be like the war against Iraq a decade
ago, with its decisive liberation of territory and its swift conclusion. It will
not look like the air war above Kosovo two years ago, where no ground troops
were used and not a single American was lost in combat.

Our response involves far more than instant retaliation and isolated strikes.
Americans should not expect one battle, but a lengthy campaign, unlike any other
we have seen. It may include dramatic strikes, visible on television, and covert
operations, secret even in success. We will starve terrorists of funding, turn
them one against another, drive them from place to place, until there is no
refuge or rest. And we will pursue nations that provide aid or safe haven to
terrorism.

Every nation, in every region, now has a decision to make. Either you are with
us, or you are with the terrorists. From this day forward, any nation that
continues to harbor or support terrorism will be regarded by the United States
as a hostile regime.

Our Nation has been put on notice: We are not immune from attack. We will take
defensive measures against terrorism to protect Americans. Today, dozens of
Federal departments and agencies, as well as State and local governments, have
responsibilities affecting homeland security.

These efforts must be coordinated at the highest level. So tonight I announce
the creation of a Cabinet-level position reporting directly to methe Office of
Homeland Security. And tonight I also announce a distinguished American to lead
this effort to strengthen Americas securitya military veteran, an effective
Governor, a true patriot, and my trusted friend, Pennsylvanias Governor Tom
Ridge. He will lead, oversee, and coordinate a comprehensive national strategy
to safeguard our country against terrorism, and respond to any attacks that may
come.

These measures are essential. But the only way to defeat terrorism as a threat
to our way of life is to stop it, eliminate it, and destroy it where it grows.

Many will be involved in this effort, from FBI agents to intelligence operatives
to the reservists we have called to active duty. All deserve our thanks, and all
have our prayers. And tonight, a few miles from the damaged Pentagon, I have a
message for our military: Be ready. I have called the armed forces to alert, and
there is a reason. The hour is coming when America will act, and you will make
us proud.

This is not, however, just Americas fight. And what is at stake is not just
Americas freedom. This is the worlds fight. This is civilizations fight. This
is the fight of all who believe in progress and pluralism, tolerance and
freedom.

We ask every nation to join us. We will ask, and we will need, the help of
police forces, intelligence services, and banking systems around the world. The
United States is grateful that many nations and many international organizations
have already respondedwith sympathy and with support. Nations from Latin
America, to Asia, to Africa, to Europe, to the Islamic world. Perhaps the NATO
Charter reflects best the attitude of the world: an attack on one is an attack
on all.

The civilized world is rallying to Americas side. They understand that if this
terror goes unpunished, their own cities, their own citizens may be next.
Terror, unanswered, can not only bring down buildings, it can threaten the
stability of legitimate governments. And we will not allow it.

Americans are asking: What is expected of us?

I ask you to live your lives and hug your children. I know many citizens have
fears tonight, and I ask you to be calm and resolute, even in the face of a
continuing threat.

I ask you to uphold the values of America, and remember why so many have come
here. We are in a fight for our principles, and our first responsibility is to
live by them. No one should be singled out for unfair treatment or unkind words
because of their ethnic background or religious faith.

I ask you to continue to support the victims of this tragedy with your
contributions. Those who want to give can go to a central source of information,
libertyunites.org, to find the names of groups providing direct help in New
York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia. The thousands of FBI agents who are now at
work in this investigation may need your cooperation, and I ask you to give it.

I ask for your patience, with the delays and inconveniences that may accompany
tighter securityand for your patience in what will be a long struggle.

I ask your continued participation and confidence in the American economy.
Terrorists attacked a symbol of American prosperity. They did not touch its
source. America is successful because of the hard work, and creativity, and
enterprise of our people.

These were the true strengths of our economy before September eleventh, and they
are our strengths today. Finally, please continue praying for the victims of
terror and their families, for those in uniform, and for our great country.
Prayer has comforted us in sorrow, and will help strengthen us for the journey
ahead.

Tonight I thank my fellow Americans for what you have already done and for what
you will do. And ladies and gentlemen of the Congress, I thank you, their
representatives, for what you have already done, and for what we will do
together.

Tonight, we face new and sudden national challenges. We will come together to
improve air safety, to dramatically expand the number of air marshals on
domestic flights, and take new measures to prevent hijacking. We will come
together to promote stability and keep our airlines flying with direct
assistance during this emergency. We will come together to give law enforcement
the additional tools it needs to track down terror here at home. We will come
together to strengthen our intelligence capabilities to know the plans of
terrorists before they act, and find them before they strike. We will come
together to take active steps that strengthen Americas economy, and put our
people back to work.

Tonight we welcome here two leaders who embody the extraordinary spirit of all
New Yorkers: Governor George Pataki and Mayor Rudy Giuliani. As a symbol of
Americas resolve, my Administration will work with the Congress, and these two
leaders, to show the world that we will rebuild New York City.

After all that has just passedall the lives taken, and all the possibilities
and hopes that died with themit is natural to wonder if Americas future is one
of fear. Some speak of an age of terror. I know there are struggles ahead, and
dangers to face. But this country will define our times, not be defined by them.
As long as the United States of America is determined and strong, this will not
be an age of terror; this will be an age of liberty, here and across the world.

Great harm has been done to us. We have suffered great loss. And in our grief
and anger we have found our mission and our moment. Freedom and fear are at war.
The advance of human freedomthe great achievement of our time, and the great
hope of every timenow depends on us. Our Nation this generationwill lift a
dark threat of violence from our people and our future. We will rally the world
to this cause, by our efforts and by our courage. We will not tire, we will not
falter, and we will not fail.

It is my hope that in the months and years ahead, life will return almost to
normal. Well go back to our lives and routines, and that is good. Even grief
recedes with time and grace. But our resolve must not pass. Each of us will
remember what happened that day, and to whom it happened. We will remember the
moment the news camewhere we were and what we were doing. Some will remember an
image of fire, or a story of rescue. Some will carry memories of a face and a
voice gone forever. And I will carry this. It is the police shield of a man
named George Howard, who died at the World Trade Center trying to save others.
It was given to me by his mom, Arlene, as a proud memorial to her son. This is
my reminder of lives that ended, and a task that does not end.

I will not forget this wound to our country, or those who inflicted it. I will
not yieldI will not restI will not relent in waging this struggle for the
freedom and security of the American people.

The course of this conflict is not known, yet its outcome is certain. Freedom
and fear, justice and cruelty, have always been at war, and we know that God is
not neutral between them.

Fellow citizens, we will meet violence with patient justiceassured of the
rightness of our cause, and confident of the victories to come. In all that lies
before us, may God grant us wisdom, and may He watch over the United States of
America.

Thank you.

Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress,
distinguished guests, fellow citizens: As we gather tonight, our Nation is at
war; our economy is in recession; and the civilized world faces unprecedented
dangers. Yet, the state of our Union has never been stronger.

We last met in an hour of shock and suffering. In 4 short months, our Nation has
comforted the victims, begun to rebuild New York and the Pentagon, rallied a
great coalition, captured, arrested, and rid the world of thousands of
terrorists, destroyed Afghanistan's terrorist training camps, saved a people
from starvation, and freed a country from brutal oppression.

The American flag flies again over our Embassy in Kabul. Terrorists who once
occupied Afghanistan now occupy cells at Guantanamo Bay. And terrorist leaders
who urged followers to sacrifice their lives are running for their own.

America and Afghanistan are now allies against terror. We'll be partners in
rebuilding that country. And this evening we welcomed the distinguished interim
leader of a liberated Afghanistan, Chairman Hamid Karzai.

The last time we met in this Chamber, the mothers and daughters of Afghanistan
were captives in their own homes, forbidden from working or going to school.
Today women are free and are part of Afghanistan's new Government. And we
welcome the new Minister of Women's Affairs, Dr. Sima Samar.

Our progress is a tribute to the spirit of the Afghan people, to the resolve of
our coalition, and to the might of the United States military. When I called our
troops into action, I did so with complete confidence in their courage and
skill. And tonight, thanks to them, we are winning the war on terror. The men
and women of our Armed Forces have delivered a message now clear to every enemy
of the United States: Even 7,000 miles away, across oceans and continents, on
mountaintops and in caves, you will not escape the justice of this Nation.

For many Americans, these 4 months have brought sorrow and pain that will never
completely go away. Every day a retired firefighter returns to Ground Zero to
feel closer to his two sons who died there. At a memorial in New York, a little
boy left his football with a note for his lost father: "Dear Daddy, please take
this to heaven. I don't want to play football until I can play with you again
some day." Last month, at the grave of her husband, Micheal, a CIA officer and
marine who died in Mazar-e-Sharif, Shannon Spann said these words of farewell,
"Semper Fi, my love." Shannon is with us tonight. Shannon, I assure you and
all who have lost a loved one that our cause is just, and our country will never
forget the debt we owe Michael and all who gave their lives for freedom.

Our cause is just, and it continues. Our discoveries in Afghanistan confirmed
our worst fears and showed us the true scope of the task ahead. We have seen the
depth of our enemies' hatred in videos where they laugh about the loss of
innocent life. And the depth of their hatred is equaled by the madness of the
destruction they design. We have found diagrams of American nuclear powerplants
and public water facilities, detailed instructions for making chemical weapons,
surveillance maps of American cities, and thorough descriptions of landmarks in
America and throughout the world.

What we have found in Afghanistan confirms that, far from ending there, our war
against terror is only beginning. Most of the 19 men who hijacked planes on
September the 11th were trained in Afghanistan's camps, and so were tens of
thousands of others. Thousands of dangerous killers, schooled in the methods of
murder, often supported by outlaw regimes, are now spread throughout the world
like ticking timebombs, set to go off without warning.

Thanks to the work of our law enforcement officials and coalition partners,
hundreds of terrorists have been arrested. Yet, tens of thousands of trained
terrorists are still at large. These enemies view the entire world as a
battlefield, and we must pursue them wherever they are. So long as training
camps operate, so long as nations harbor terrorists, freedom is at risk. And
America and our allies must not and will not allow it.

Our Nation will continue to be steadfast and patient and persistent in the
pursuit of two great objectives. First, we will shut down terrorist camps,
disrupt terrorist plans, and bring terrorists to justice. And second, we must
prevent the terrorists and regimes who seek chemical, biological, or nuclear
weapons from threatening the United States and the world.

Our military has put the terror training camps of Afghanistan out of business,
yet camps still exist in at least a dozen countries. A terrorist underworld,
including groups like Hamas, Hizballah, Islamic Jihad, Jaish-e-Mohammed,
operates in remote jungles and deserts and hides in the centers of large cities.

While the most visible military action is in Afghanistan, America is acting
elsewhere. We now have troops in the Philippines, helping to train that
country's armed forces to go after terrorist cells that have executed an
American and still hold hostages. Our soldiers, working with the Bosnian
Government, seized terrorists who were plotting to bomb our Embassy. Our Navy is
patrolling the coast of Africa to block the shipment of weapons and the
establishment of terrorist camps in Somalia.

My hope is that all nations will heed our call and eliminate the terrorist
parasites who threaten their countries and our own. Many nations are acting
forcefully. Pakistan is now cracking down on terror, and I admire the strong
leadership of President Musharraf. But some governments will be timid in the
face of terror. And make no mistake about it: If they do not act, America will.

Our second goal is to prevent regimes that sponsor terror from threatening
America or our friends and allies with weapons of mass destruction. Some of
these regimes have been pretty quiet since September the 11th, but we know their
true nature.

North Korea is a regime arming with missiles and weapons of mass destruction,
while starving its citizens.

Iran aggressively pursues these weapons and exports terror, while an unelected
few repress the Iranian people's hope for freedom.

Iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward America and to support terror. The
Iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax and nerve gas and nuclear weapons
for over a decade. This is a regime that has already used poison gas to murder
thousands of its own citizens, leaving the bodies of mothers huddled over their
dead children. This is a regime that agreed to international inspections, then
kicked out the inspectors. This is a regime that has something to hide from the
civilized world.

States like these and their terrorist allies constitute an axis of evil, arming
to threaten the peace of the world. By seeking weapons of mass destruction,
these regimes pose a grave and growing danger. They could provide these arms to
terrorists, giving them the means to match their hatred. They could attack our
allies or attempt to blackmail the United States. In any of these cases, the
price of indifference would be catastrophic.

We will work closely with our coalition to deny terrorists and their state
sponsors the materials, technology, and expertise to make and deliver weapons of
mass destruction. We will develop and deploy effective missile defenses to
protect America and our allies from sudden attack. And all nations should know:
America will do what is necessary to ensure our Nation's security.

We'll be deliberate; yet, time is not on our side. I will not wait on events
while dangers gather. I will not stand by as peril draws closer and closer. The
United States of America will not permit the world's most dangerous regimes to
threaten us with the world's most destructive weapons.

Our war on terror is well begun, but it is only begun. This campaign may not be
finished on our watch; yet, it must be and it will be waged on our watch. We
can't stop short. If we stop now, leaving terror camps intact and terrorist
states unchecked, our sense of security would be false and temporary. History
has called America and our allies to action, and it is both our responsibility
and our privilege to fight freedom's fight.

Our first priority must always be the security of our Nation, and that will be
reflected in the budget I send to Congress. My budget supports three great goals
for America: We will win this war; we will protect our homeland; and we will
revive our economy.

September the 11th brought out the best in America and the best in this
Congress. And I join the American people in applauding your unity and resolve.
Now Americans deserve to have this same spirit directed toward addressing
problems here at home. I'm a proud member of my party. Yet as we act to win the
war, protect our people, and create jobs in America, we must act, first and
foremost, not as Republicans, not as Democrats but as Americans.

It costs a lot to fight this war. We have spent more than a billion dollars a
month, over $30 million a day, and we must be prepared for future operations.
Afghanistan proved that expensive precision weapons defeat the enemy and spare
innocent lives, and we need more of them. We need to replace aging aircraft and
make our military more agile to put our troops anywhere in the world quickly and
safely. Our men and women in uniform deserve the best weapons, the best
equipment, the best training, and they also deserve another pay raise.

My budget includes the largest increase in defense spending in two decades,
because while the price of freedom and security is high, it is never too high.
Whatever it costs to defend our country, we will pay.

The next priority of my budget is to do everything possible to protect our
citizens and strengthen our Nation against the ongoing threat of another attack.
Time and distance from the events of September the 11th will not make us safer
unless we act on its lessons. America is no longer protected by vast oceans. We
are protected from attack only by vigorous action abroad and increased vigilance
at home.

My budget nearly doubles funding for a sustained strategy of homeland security,
focused on four key areas: bioterrorism, emergency response, airport and border
security, and improved intelligence. We will develop vaccines to fight anthrax
and other deadly diseases. We'll increase funding to help States and communities
train and equip our heroic police and firefighters. We will improve intelligence
collection and sharing, expand patrols at our borders, strengthen the security
of air travel, and use technology to track the arrivals and departures of
visitors to the United States.

Homeland security will make America not only stronger but, in many ways, better.
Knowledge gained from bioterrorism research will improve public health. Stronger
police and fire departments will mean safer neighborhoods. Stricter border
enforcement will help combat illegal drugs. And as government works to better
secure our homeland, America will continue to depend on the eyes and ears of
alert citizens.

A few days before Christmas, an airline flight attendant spotted a passenger
lighting a match. The crew and passengers quickly subdued the man, who had been
trained by Al Qaida and was armed with explosives. The people on that plane were
alert and, as a result, likely saved nearly 200 lives. And tonight we welcome
and thank flight attendants Hermis Moutardier and Christina Jones.

Once we have funded our national security and our homeland security, the final
great priority of my budget is economic security for the American people. To
achieve these great national objectives--to win the war, protect the homeland,
and revitalize our economy--our budget will run a deficit that will be small and
short term, so long as Congress restrains spending and acts in a fiscally
responsible manner. We have clear priorities, and we must act at home with the
same purpose and resolve we have shown overseas. We'll prevail in the war, and
we will defeat this recession.

Americans who have lost their jobs need our help, and I support extending
unemployment benefits and direct assistance for health care coverage. Yet,
American workers want more than unemployment checks; they want a steady
paycheck. When America works, America prospers, so my economic security plan can
be summed up in one word: jobs.

Good jobs begin with good schools, and here we've made a fine start. Republicans
and Democrats worked together to achieve historic education reform so that no
child is left behind. I was proud to work with members of both parties: Chairman
John Boehner and Congressman George Miller; Senator Judd Gregg. And I was so
proud of our work, I even had nice things to say about my friend Ted Kennedy.
[Laughter] I know the folks at the Crawford coffee shop couldn't believe I'd say
such a thing-- [laughter]--but our work on this bill shows what is possible if
we set aside posturing and focus on results.

There is more to do. We need to prepare our children to read and succeed in
school with improved Head Start and early childhood development programs. We
must upgrade our teacher colleges and teacher training and launch a major
recruiting drive with a great goal for America, a quality teacher in every
classroom.

Good jobs also depend on reliable and affordable energy. This Congress must act
to encourage conservation, promote technology, build infrastructure, and it must
act to increase energy production at home so America is less dependent on
foreign oil.

Good jobs depend on expanded trade. Selling into new markets creates new jobs,
so I ask Congress to finally approve trade promotion authority.

On these two key issues, trade and energy, the House of Representatives has
acted to create jobs, and I urge the Senate to pass this legislation.

Good jobs depend on sound tax policy. Last year, some in this Hall thought my
tax relief plan was too small; some thought it was too big. But when the checks
arrived in the mail, most Americans thought tax relief was just about right.
Congress listened to the people and responded by reducing tax rates, doubling
the child credit, and ending the death tax. For the sake of long-term growth and
to help Americans plan for the future, let's make these tax cuts permanent.

The way out of this recession, the way to create jobs, is to grow the economy by
encouraging investment in factories and equipment and by speeding up tax relief
so people have more money to spend. For the sake of American workers, let's pass
a stimulus package.

Good jobs must be the aim of welfare reform. As we reauthorize these important
reforms, we must always remember the goal is to reduce dependency on government
and offer every American the dignity of a job.

Americans know economic security can vanish in an instant without health
security. I ask Congress to join me this year to enact a patients' bill of
rights, to give uninsured workers credits to help buy health coverage, to
approve an historic increase in the spending for veterans' health, and to give
seniors a sound and modern Medicare system that includes coverage for
prescription drugs.

A good job should lead to security in retirement. I ask Congress to enact new
safeguards for 401K and pension plans. Employees who have worked hard and saved
all their lives should not have to risk losing everything if their company
fails. Through stricter accounting standards and tougher disclosure
requirements, corporate America must be made more accountable to employees and
shareholders and held to the highest standards of conduct.

Retirement security also depends upon keeping the commitments of Social
Security, and we will. We must make Social Security financially stable and allow
personal retirement accounts for younger workers who choose them.

Members, you and I will work together in the months ahead on other issues:
productive farm policy; a cleaner environment; broader homeownership, especially
among minorities; and ways to encourage the good work of charities and
faith-based groups. I ask you to join me on these important domestic issues in
the same spirit of cooperation we've applied to our war against terrorism.

During these last few months, I've been humbled and privileged to see the true
character of this country in a time of testing. Our enemies believed America was
weak and materialistic, that we would splinter in fear and selfishness. They
were as wrong as they are evil.

The American people have responded magnificently, with courage and compassion,
strength and resolve. As I have met the heroes, hugged the families, and looked
into the tired faces of rescuers, I have stood in awe of the American people.

And I hope you will join me--I hope you will join me in expressing thanks to one
American for the strength and calm and comfort she brings to our Nation in
crisis, our First Lady, Laura Bush.

None of us would ever wish the evil that was done on September the 11th. Yet,
after America was attacked, it was as if our entire country looked into a mirror
and saw our better selves. We were reminded that we are citizens with
obligations to each other, to our country, and to history. We began to think
less of the goods we can accumulate and more about the good we can do.

For too long our culture has said, "If it feels good, do it." Now America is
embracing a new ethic and a new creed, "Let's roll." In the sacrifice of
soldiers, the fierce brotherhood of firefighters, and the bravery and generosity
of ordinary citizens, we have glimpsed what a new culture of responsibility
could look like. We want to be a nation that serves goals larger than self.
We've been offered a unique opportunity, and we must not let this moment pass.

My call tonight is for every American to commit at least 2 years, 4,000 hours
over the rest of your lifetime, to the service of your neighbors and your
Nation. Many are already serving, and I thank you. If you aren't sure how to
help, I've got a good place to start. To sustain and extend the best that has
emerged in America, I invite you to join the new USA Freedom Corps. The Freedom
Corps will focus on three areas of need: responding in case of crisis at home;
rebuilding our communities; and extending American compassion throughout the
world.

One purpose of the USA Freedom Corps will be homeland security. America needs
retired doctors and nurses who can be mobilized in major emergencies, volunteers
to help police and fire departments, transportation and utility workers
well-trained in spotting danger.

Our country also needs citizens working to rebuild our communities. We need
mentors to love children, especially children whose parents are in prison. And
we need more talented teachers in troubled schools. USA Freedom Corps will
expand and improve the good efforts of AmeriCorps and Senior Corps to recruit
more than 200,000 new volunteers.

And America needs citizens to extend the compassion of our country to every part
of the world. So we will renew the promise of the Peace Corps, double its
volunteers over the next 5 years, and ask it to join a new effort to encourage
development and education and opportunity in the Islamic world.

This time of adversity offers a unique moment of opportunity, a moment we must
seize to change our culture. Through the gathering momentum of millions of acts
of service and decency and kindness, I know we can overcome evil with greater
good.

And we have a great opportunity during this time of war to lead the world toward
the values that will bring lasting peace. All fathers and mothers, in all
societies, want their children to be educated and live free from poverty and
violence. No people on Earth yearn to be oppressed or aspire to servitude or
eagerly await the midnight knock of the secret police. If anyone doubts this,
let them look to Afghanistan, where the Islamic "street" greeted the fall of
tyranny with song and celebration. Let the skeptics look to Islam's own rich
history, with its centuries of learning and tolerance and progress. America will
lead by defending liberty and justice because they are right and true and
unchanging for all people everywhere.

No nation owns these aspirations, and no nation is exempt from them. We have no
intention of imposing our culture. But America will always stand firm for the
nonnegotiable demands of human dignity: the rule of law; limits on the power of
the state; respect for women; private property; free speech; equal justice; and
religious tolerance.

America will take the side of brave men and women who advocate these values
around the world, including the Islamic world, because we have a greater
objective than eliminating threats and containing resentment. We seek a just and
peaceful world beyond the war on terror.

In this moment of opportunity, a common danger is erasing old rivalries. America
is working with Russia and China and India, in ways we have never before, to
achieve peace and prosperity. In every region, free markets and free trade and
free societies are proving their power to lift lives. Together with friends and
allies from Europe to Asia and Africa to Latin America, we will demonstrate that
the forces of terror cannot stop the momentum of freedom.

The last time I spoke here, I expressed the hope that life would return to
normal. In some ways, it has. In others, it never will. Those of us who have
lived through these challenging times have been changed by them. We've come to
know truths that we will never question: Evil is real, and it must be opposed.
Beyond all differences of race or creed, we are one country, mourning together
and facing danger together. Deep in the American character, there is honor, and
it is stronger than cynicism. And many have discovered again that even in
tragedy--especially in tragedy--God is near.

In a single instant, we realized that this will be a decisive decade in the
history of liberty, that we've been called to a unique role in human events.
Rarely has the world faced a choice more clear or consequential.

Our enemies send other people's children on missions of suicide and murder. They
embrace tyranny and death as a cause and a creed. We stand for a different
choice, made long ago on the day of our founding. We affirm it again today. We
choose freedom and the dignity of every life.

Steadfast in our purpose, we now press on. We have known freedom's price. We
have shown freedom's power. And in this great conflict, my fellow Americans, we
will see freedom's victory.

Thank you all. May God bless.

Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, distinguished citizens
and fellow citizens: Every year, by law and by custom, we meet here to consider
the state of the Union. This year, we gather in this Chamber deeply aware of
decisive days that lie ahead.

You and I serve our country in a time of great consequence. During this session
of Congress, we have the duty to reform domestic programs vital to our country.
We have the opportunity to save millions of lives abroad from a terrible
disease. We will work for a prosperity that is broadly shared, and we will
answer every danger and every enemy that threatens the American people.

In all these days of promise and days of reckoning, we can be confident. In a
whirlwind of change and hope and peril, our faith is sure; our resolve is firm;
and our Union is strong.

This country has many challenges. We will not deny, we will not ignore, we will
not pass along our problems to other Congresses, to other Presidents, and other
generations. We will confront them with focus and clarity and courage.

During the last 2 years, we have seen what can be accomplished when we work
together. To lift the standards of our public schools, we achieved historic
education reform, which must now be carried out in every school and in every
classroom so that every child in America can read and learn and succeed in life.
To protect our country, we reorganized our Government and created the Department
of Homeland Security, which is mobilizing against the threats of a new era. To
bring our economy out of recession, we delivered the largest tax relief in a
generation. To insist on integrity in American business, we passed tough
reforms, and we are holding corporate criminals to account.

Some might call this a good record. I call it a good start. Tonight I ask the
House and the Senate to join me in the next bold steps to serve our fellow
citizens.

Our first goal is clear: We must have an economy that grows fast enough to
employ every man and woman who seeks a job. After recession, terrorist attacks,
corporate scandals, and stock market declines, our economy is recovering. Yet,
it's not growing fast enough or strongly enough. With unemployment rising, our
Nation needs more small businesses to open, more companies to invest and expand,
more employers to put up the sign that says, "Help Wanted." Jobs are created
when the economy grows. The economy grows when Americans have more money to
spend and invest, and the best and fairest way to make sure Americans have that
money is not to tax it away in the first place.

I am proposing that all the income-tax reductions set for 2004 and 2006 be made
permanent and effective this year. And under my plan, as soon as I've signed the
bill, this extra money will start showing up in workers' paychecks. Instead of
gradually reducing the marriage penalty, we should do it now. Instead of slowly
raising the child credit to $1,000, we should send the checks to American
families now.

The tax relief is for everyone who pays income taxes, and it will help our
economy immediately: 92 million Americans will keep, this year, an average of
almost $1,100 more of their own money; a family of 4 with an income of $40,000
would see their Federal income taxes fall from $1,178 to $45 per year; our plan
will improve the bottom line for more than 23 million small businesses.

You, the Congress, have already passed all these reductions and promised them
for future years. If this tax relief is good for Americans 3, or 5, or 7 years
from now, it is even better for Americans today.

We should also strengthen the economy by treating investors equally in our tax
laws. It's fair to tax a company's profits. It is not fair to again tax the
shareholder on the same profits. To boost investor confidence and to help the
nearly 10 million seniors who receive dividend income, I ask you to end the
unfair double taxation of dividends.

Lower taxes and greater investment will help this economy expand. More jobs mean
more taxpayers and higher revenues to our Government. The best way to address
the deficit and move toward a balanced budget is to encourage economic growth
and to show some spending discipline in Washington, DC.

We must work together to fund only our most important priorities. I will send
you a budget that increases discretionary spending by 4 percent next year, about
as much as the average family's income is expected to grow. And that is a good
benchmark for us. Federal spending should not rise any faster than the paychecks
of American families.

A growing economy and a focus on essential priorities will be crucial to the
future of Social Security. As we continue to work together to keep Social
Security sound and reliable, we must offer younger workers a chance to invest in
retirement accounts that they will control and they will own.

Our second goal is high quality, affordable health for all Americans. The
American system of medicine is a model of skill and innovation, with a pace of
discovery that is adding good years to our lives. Yet for many people, medical
care costs too much, and many have no health coverage at all. These problems
will not be solved with a nationalized health care system that dictates coverage
and rations care.

Instead, we must work toward a system in which all Americans have a good
insurance policy, choose their own doctors, and seniors and low- income
Americans receive the help they need. Instead of bureaucrats and trial lawyers
and HMOs, we must put doctors and nurses and patients back in charge of American
medicine.

Health care reform must begin with Medicare. Medicare is the binding commitment
of a caring society. We must renew that commitment by giving seniors access to
preventive medicine and new drugs that are transforming health care in America.

Seniors happy with the current Medicare system should be able to keep their
coverage just the way it is. And just like you, the Members of Congress, and
your staffs and other Federal employees, all seniors should have the choice of a
health care plan that provides prescription drugs.

My budget will commit an additional $400 billion over the next decade to reform
and strengthen Medicare. Leaders of both political parties have talked for years
about strengthening Medicare. I urge the Members of this new Congress to act
this year.

To improve our health care system, we must address one of the prime causes of
higher cost, the constant threat that physicians and hospitals will be unfairly
sued. Because of excessive litigation, everybody pays more for health care, and
many parts of America are losing fine doctors. No one has ever been healed by a
frivolous lawsuit. I urge the Congress to pass medical liability reform.

Our third goal is to promote energy independence for our country, while
dramatically improving the environment. I have sent you a comprehensive energy
plan to promote energy efficiency and conservation, to develop cleaner
technology, and to produce more energy at home. I have sent you Clear Skies
legislation that mandates a 70-percent cut in air pollution from powerplants
over the next 15 years. I have sent you a Healthy Forests Initiative, to help
prevent the catastrophic fires that devastate communities, kill wildlife, and
burn away millions of acres of treasured forests.

I urge you to pass these measures, for the good of both our environment and our
economy. Even more, I ask you to take a crucial step and protect our environment
in ways that generations before us could not have imagined.

In this century, the greatest environmental progress will come about not through
endless lawsuits or command-and-control regulations but through technology and
innovation. Tonight I'm proposing $1.2 billion in research funding so that
America can lead the world in developing clean, hydrogen-powered automobiles.

A simple chemical reaction between hydrogen and oxygen generates energy, which
can be used to power a car, producing only water, not exhaust fumes. With a new
national commitment, our scientists and engineers will overcome obstacles to
taking these cars from laboratory to showroom, so that the first car driven by a
child born today could be powered by hydrogen and pollution-free. Join me in
this important innovation to make our air significantly cleaner and our country
much less dependent on foreign sources of energy.

Our fourth goal is to apply the compassion of America to the deepest problems of
America. For so many in our country, the homeless and the fatherless, the
addicted, the need is great. Yet there's power, wonder- working power, in the
goodness and idealism and faith of the American people.

Americans are doing the work of compassion every day, visiting prisoners,
providing shelter for battered women, bringing companionship to lonely seniors.
These good works deserve our praise. They deserve our personal support, and when
appropriate, they deserve the assistance of the Federal Government.

I urge you to pass both my Faith-Based Initiative and the Citizen Service Act,
to encourage acts of compassion that can transform America, one heart and one
soul at a time.

Last year, I called on my fellow citizens to participate in the USA Freedom
Corps, which is enlisting tens of thousands of new volunteers across America.
Tonight I ask Congress and the American people to focus the spirit of service
and the resources of Government on the needs of some of our most vulnerable
citizens, boys and girls trying to grow up without guidance and attention and
children who have to go through a prison gate to be hugged by their mom or dad.
I propose a $450 million initiative to bring mentors to more than a million
disadvantaged junior high students and children of prisoners. Government will
support the training and recruiting of mentors. Yet it is the men and women of
America who will fill the need. One mentor, one person can change a life
forever, and I urge you to be that one person.

Another cause of hopelessness is addiction to drugs. Addiction crowds out
friendship, ambition, moral conviction and reduces all the richness of life to a
single destructive desire. As a government, we are fighting illegal drugs by
cutting off supplies and reducing demand through antidrug education programs.
Yet for those already addicted, the fight against drugs is a fight for their own
lives. Too many Americans in search of treatment cannot get it. So tonight I
propose a new $600 million program to help an additional 300,000 Americans
receive treatment over the next 3 years.

Our Nation is blessed with recovery programs that do amazing work. One of them
is found at the Healing Place Church in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. A man in the
program said, "God does miracles in people's lives, and you never think it
could be you." Tonight let us bring to all Americans who struggle with drug
addiction this message of hope: The miracle of recovery is possible, and it
could be you.

By caring for children who need mentors and for addicted men and women who need
treatment, we are building a more welcoming society, a culture that values every
life. And in this work, we must not overlook the weakest among us. I ask you to
protect infants at the very hour of their birth and end the practice of
partial-birth abortion. And because no human life should be started or ended as
the object of an experiment, I ask you to set a high standard for humanity and
pass a law against all human cloning.

The qualities of courage and compassion that we strive for in America also
determine our conduct abroad. The American flag stands for more than our power
and our interests. Our Founders dedicated this country to the cause of human
dignity, the rights of every person, and the possibilities of every life. This
conviction leads us into the world to help the afflicted and defend the peace
and confound the designs of evil men.

In Afghanistan, we helped to liberate an oppressed people. And we will continue
helping them secure their country, rebuild their society, and educate all their
children, boys and girls. In the Middle East, we will continue to seek peace
between a secure Israel and a democratic Palestine. Across the Earth, America is
feeding the hungry. More than 60 percent of international food aid comes as a
gift from the people of the United States. As our Nation moves troops and builds
alliances to make our world safer, we must also remember our calling as a
blessed country is to make the world better.

Today, on the continent of Africa, nearly 30 million people have the AIDS virus,
including 3 million children under the age 15. There are whole countries in
Africa where more than one-third of the adult population carries the infection.
More than 4 million require immediate drug treatment. Yet across that continent,
only 50,000 AIDS victims-- only 50,000--are receiving the medicine they need.

Because the AIDS diagnosis is considered a death sentence, many do not seek
treatment. Almost all who do are turned away. A doctor in rural South Africa
describes his frustration. He says, "We have no medicines. Many hospitals tell
people, 'You've got AIDS. We can't help you. Go home and die.' " In an age of
miraculous medicines, no person should have to hear those words.

AIDS can be prevented. Antiretroviral drugs can extend life for many years. And
the cost of those drugs has dropped from $12,000 a year to under $300 a year,
which places a tremendous possibility within our grasp. Ladies and gentlemen,
seldom has history offered a greater opportunity to do so much for so many.

We have confronted and will continue to confront HIV/AIDS in our own country.
And to meet a severe and urgent crisis abroad, tonight I propose the Emergency
Plan for AIDS Relief, a work of mercy beyond all current international efforts
to help the people of Africa. This comprehensive plan will prevent 7 million new
AIDS infections, treat at least 2 million people with life-extending drugs, and
provide humane care for millions of people suffering from AIDS and for children
orphaned by AIDS. I ask the Congress to commit $15 billion over the next 5
years, including nearly $10 billion in new money, to turn the tide against AIDS
in the most afflicted nations of Africa and the Caribbean.

This Nation can lead the world in sparing innocent people from a plague of
nature. And this Nation is leading the world in confronting and defeating the
manmade evil of international terrorism.

There are days when our fellow citizens do not hear news about the war on
terror. There's never a day when I do not learn of another threat or receive
reports of operations in progress or give an order in this global war against a
scattered network of killers. The war goes on, and we are winning.

To date, we've arrested or otherwise dealt with many key commanders of Al Qaida.
They include a man who directed logistics and funding for the September the 11th
attacks, the chief of Al Qaida operations in the Persian Gulf who planned the
bombings of our embassies in east Africa and the U.S.S. Cole, an Al Qaida
operations chief from Southeast Asia, a former director of Al Qaida's training
camps in Afghanistan, a key Al Qaida operative in Europe, a major Al Qaida
leader in Yemen. All told, more than 3,000 suspected terrorists have been
arrested in many countries. Many others have met a different fate. Let's put it
this way: They are no longer a problem to the United States and our friends and
allies.

We are working closely with other nations to prevent further attacks. America
and coalition countries have uncovered and stopped terrorist conspiracies
targeting the Embassy in Yemen, the American Embassy in Singapore, a Saudi
military base, ships in the Straits of Hormuz and the Straits of Gibraltar.
We've broken Al Qaida cells in Hamburg, Milan, Madrid, London, Paris, as well as
Buffalo, New York.

We have the terrorists on the run. We're keeping them on the run. One by one,
the terrorists are learning the meaning of American justice.

As we fight this war, we will remember where it began: Here, in our own country.
This Government is taking unprecedented measures to protect our people and
defend our homeland. We've intensified security at the borders and ports of
entry, posted more than 50,000 newly trained Federal screeners in airports,
begun inoculating troops and first- responders against smallpox, and are
deploying the Nation's first early warning network of sensors to detect
biological attack. And this year, for the first time, we are beginning to field
a defense to protect this Nation against ballistic missiles.

I thank the Congress for supporting these measures. I ask you tonight to add to
our future security with a major research and production effort to guard our
people against bioterrorism, called Project BioShield. The budget I send you
will propose almost $6 billion to quickly make available effective vaccines and
treatments against agents like anthrax, botulinum toxin, Ebola, and plague. We
must assume that our enemies would use these diseases as weapons, and we must
act before the dangers are upon us.

Since September the 11th, our intelligence and law enforcement agencies have
worked more closely than ever to track and disrupt the terrorists. The FBI is
improving its ability to analyze intelligence and is transforming itself to meet
new threats. Tonight I am instructing the leaders of the FBI, the CIA, the
Homeland Security, and the Department of Defense to develop a Terrorist Threat
Integration Center, to merge and analyze all threat information in a single
location. Our Government must have the very best information possible, and we
will use it to make sure the right people are in the right places to protect all
our citizens.

Our war against terror is a contest of will in which perseverance is power. In
the ruins of two towers, at the western wall of the Pentagon, on a field in
Pennsylvania, this Nation made a pledge, and we renew that pledge tonight:
Whatever the duration of this struggle and whatever the difficulties, we will
not permit the triumph of violence in the affairs of men; free people will set
the course of history.

Today, the gravest danger in the war on terror, the gravest danger facing
America and the world, is outlaw regimes that seek and possess nuclear,
chemical, and biological weapons. These regimes could use such weapons for
blackmail, terror, and mass murder. They could also give or sell those weapons
to terrorist allies, who would use them without the least hesitation.

This threat is new. America's duty is familiar. Throughout the 20th century,
small groups of men seized control of great nations, built armies and arsenals,
and set out to dominate the weak and intimidate the world. In each case, their
ambitions of cruelty and murder had no limit. In each case, the ambitions of
Hitlerism, militarism, and communism were defeated by the will of free peoples,
by the strength of great alliances, and by the might of the United States of
America.

Now, in this century, the ideology of power and domination has appeared again
and seeks to gain the ultimate weapons of terror. Once again, this Nation and
all our friends are all that stand between a world at peace and a world of chaos
and constant alarm. Once again, we are called to defend the safety of our people
and the hopes of all mankind. And we accept this responsibility.

America is making a broad and determined effort to confront these dangers. We
have called on the United Nations to fulfill its charter and stand by its demand
that Iraq disarm. We're strongly supporting the International Atomic Energy
Agency in its mission to track and control nuclear materials around the world.
We're working with other governments to secure nuclear materials in the former
Soviet Union and to strengthen global treaties banning the production and
shipment of missile technologies and weapons of mass destruction.

In all these efforts, however, America's purpose is more than to follow a
process; it is to achieve a result, the end of terrible threats to the civilized
world. All free nations have a stake in preventing sudden and catastrophic
attacks. And we're asking them to join us, and many are doing so. Yet the course
of this Nation does not depend on the decisions of others. Whatever action is
required, whenever action is necessary, I will defend the freedom and security
of the American people.

Different threats require different strategies. In Iran, we continue to see a
Government that represses its people, pursues weapons of mass destruction, and
supports terror. We also see Iranian citizens risking intimidation and death as
they speak out for liberty and human rights and democracy. Iranians, like all
people, have a right to choose their own Government and determine their own
destiny, and the United States supports their aspirations to live in freedom.

On the Korean Peninsula, an oppressive regime rules a people living in fear and
starvation. Throughout the 1990s, the United States relied on a negotiated
framework to keep North Korea from gaining nuclear weapons. We now know that
that regime was deceiving the world and developing those weapons all along. And
today the North Korean regime is using its nuclear program to incite fear and
seek concessions. America and the world will not be blackmailed.

America is working with the countries of the region, South Korea, Japan, China,
and Russia, to find a peaceful solution and to show the North Korean Government
that nuclear weapons will bring only isolation, economic stagnation, and
continued hardship. The North Korean regime will find respect in the world and
revival for its people only when it turns away from its nuclear ambitions.

Our Nation and the world must learn the lessons of the Korean Peninsula and not
allow an even greater threat to rise up in Iraq. A brutal dictator, with a
history of reckless aggression, with ties to terrorism, with great potential
wealth, will not be permitted to dominate a vital region and threaten the United
States.

Twelve years ago, Saddam Hussein faced the prospect of being the last casualty
in a war he had started and lost. To spare himself, he agreed to disarm of all
weapons of mass destruction. For the next 12 years, he systematically violated
that agreement. He pursued chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons, even while
inspectors were in his country. Nothing to date has restrained him from his
pursuit of these weapons, not economic sanctions, not isolation from the
civilized world, not even cruise missile strikes on his military facilities.

Almost 3 months ago, the United Nations Security Council gave Saddam Hussein his
final chance to disarm. He has shown instead utter contempt for the United
Nations and for the opinion of the world. The 108 U.N. inspectors were sent to
conduct--were not sent to conduct a scavenger hunt for hidden materials across a
country the size of California. The job of the inspectors is to verify that
Iraq's regime is disarming. It is up to Iraq to show exactly where it is hiding
its banned weapons, lay those weapons out for the world to see, and destroy them
as directed. Nothing like this has happened.

The United Nations concluded in 1999 that Saddam Hussein had biological weapons
sufficient to produce over 25,000 liters of anthrax, enough doses to kill
several million people. He hasn't accounted for that material. He's given no
evidence that he has destroyed it. The United Nations concluded that Saddam
Hussein had materials sufficient to produce more than 38,000 liters of botulinum
toxin, enough to subject millions of people to death by respiratory failure. He
hasn't accounted for that material. He's given no evidence that he has destroyed
it. Our intelligence officials estimate that Saddam Hussein had the materials to
produce as much as 500 tons of sarin, mustard, and VX nerve agent. In such
quantities, these chemical agents could also kill untold thousands. He's not
accounted for these materials. He has given no evidence that he has destroyed
them. U.S. intelligence indicates that Saddam Hussein had upwards of 30,000
munitions capable of delivering chemical agents. Inspectors recently turned up
16 of them, despite Iraq's recent declaration denying their existence. Saddam
Hussein has not accounted for the remaining 29,984 of these prohibited
munitions. He's given no evidence that he has destroyed them.

From three Iraqi defectors we know that Iraq, in the late 1990s, had several
mobile biological weapons labs. These are designed to produce germ warfare
agents and can be moved from place to a place to evade inspectors. Saddam
Hussein has not disclosed these facilities. He's given no evidence that he has
destroyed them.

The International Atomic Energy Agency confirmed in the 1990s that Saddam
Hussein had an advanced nuclear weapons development program, had a design for a
nuclear weapon, and was working on five different methods of enriching uranium
for a bomb. The British Government has learned that Saddam Hussein recently
sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa. Our intelligence sources
tell us that he has attempted to purchase high-strength aluminum tubes suitable
for nuclear weapons production. Saddam Hussein has not credibly explained these
activities. He clearly has much to hide.

The dictator of Iraq is not disarming. To the contrary, he is deceiving. From
intelligence sources we know, for instance, that thousands of Iraqi security
personnel are at work hiding documents and materials from the U.N. inspectors,
sanitizing inspection sites, and monitoring the inspectors themselves. Iraqi
officials accompany the inspectors in order to intimidate witnesses.

Iraq is blocking U-2 surveillance flights requested by the United Nations. Iraqi
intelligence officers are posing as the scientists inspectors are supposed to
interview. Real scientists have been coached by Iraqi officials on what to say.
Intelligence sources indicate that Saddam Hussein has ordered that scientists
who cooperate with U.N. inspectors in disarming Iraq will be killed, along with
their families.

Year after year, Saddam Hussein has gone to elaborate lengths, spent enormous
sums, taken great risks to build and keep weapons of mass destruction. But why?
The only possible explanation, the only possible use he could have for those
weapons, is to dominate, intimidate, or attack.

With nuclear arms or a full arsenal of chemical and biological weapons, Saddam
Hussein could resume his ambitions of conquest in the Middle East and create
deadly havoc in that region. And this Congress and the American people must
recognize another threat. Evidence from intelligence sources, secret
communications, and statements by people now in custody reveal that Saddam
Hussein aids and protects terrorists, including members of Al Qaida. Secretly
and without fingerprints, he could provide one of his hidden weapons to
terrorists or help them develop their own.

Before September the 11th, many in the world believed that Saddam Hussein could
be contained. But chemical agents, lethal viruses, and shadowy terrorist
networks are not easily contained. Imagine those 19 hijackers with other weapons
and other plans, this time armed by Saddam Hussein. It would take one vial, one
canister, one crate slipped into this country to bring a day of horror like none
we have ever known. We will do everything in our power to make sure that that
day never comes.

Some have said we must not act until the threat is imminent. Since when have
terrorists and tyrants announced their intentions, politely putting us on notice
before they strike? If this threat is permitted to fully and suddenly emerge,
all actions, all words, and all recriminations would come too late. Trusting in
the sanity and restraint of Saddam Hussein is not a strategy, and it is not an
option.

The dictator who is assembling the world's most dangerous weapons has already
used them on whole villages, leaving thousands of his own citizens dead, blind,
or disfigured. Iraqi refugees tell us how forced confessions are obtained, by
torturing children while their parents are made to watch. International human
rights groups have cataloged other methods used in the torture chambers of Iraq:
electric shock, burning with hot irons, dripping acid on the skin, mutilation
with electric drills, cutting out tongues, and rape. If this is not evil, then
evil has no meaning.

And tonight I have a message for the brave and oppressed people of Iraq: Your
enemy is not surrounding your country; your enemy is ruling your country. And
the day he and his regime are removed from power will be the day of your
liberation.

The world has waited 12 years for Iraq to disarm. America will not accept a
serious and mounting threat to our country and our friends and our allies. The
United States will ask the U.N. Security Council to convene on February the 5th
to consider the facts of Iraq's ongoing defiance of the world. Secretary of
State Powell will present information and intelligence about Iraqi's
legal--Iraq's illegal weapons programs, its attempt to hide those weapons from
inspectors, and its links to terrorist groups.

We will consult. But let there be no misunderstanding: If Saddam Hussein does
not fully disarm, for the safety of our people and for the peace of the world,
we will lead a coalition to disarm him.

Tonight I have a message for the men and women who will keep the peace, members
of the American Armed Forces: Many of you are assembling in or near the Middle
East, and some crucial hours may lay ahead. In those hours, the success of our
cause will depend on you. Your training has prepared you. Your honor will guide
you. You believe in America, and America believes in you.

Sending Americans into battle is the most profound decision a President can
make. The technologies of war have changed; the risks and suffering of war have
not. For the brave Americans who bear the risk, no victory is free from sorrow.
This Nation fights reluctantly, because we know the cost and we dread the days
of mourning that always come.

We seek peace. We strive for peace. And sometimes peace must be defended. A
future lived at the mercy of terrible threats is no peace at all. If war is
forced upon us, we will fight in a just cause and by just means, sparing, in
every way we can, the innocent. And if war is forced upon us, we will fight with
the full force and might of the United States military, and we will prevail.

And as we and our coalition partners are doing in Afghanistan, we will bring to
the Iraqi people food and medicines and supplies and freedom.

Many challenges, abroad and at home, have arrived in a single season. In 2
years, America has gone from a sense of invulnerability to an awareness of
peril, from bitter division in small matters to calm unity in great causes. And
we go forward with confidence, because this call of history has come to the
right country.

Americans are a resolute people who have risen to every test of our time.
Adversity has revealed the character of our country, to the world and to
ourselves. America is a strong nation and honorable in the use of our strength.
We exercise power without conquest, and we sacrifice for the liberty of
strangers.

Americans are a free people, who know that freedom is the right of every person
and the future of every nation. The liberty we prize is not America's gift to
the world, it is God's gift to humanity.

We Americans have faith in ourselves, but not in ourselves alone. We do not
know--we do not claim to know all the ways of providence, yet we can trust in
them, placing our confidence in the loving God behind all of life and all of
history.

May He guide us now. And may God continue to bless the United States of America.

Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, distinguished guests,
and fellow citizens: America this evening is a nation called to great
responsibilities, and we are rising to meet them.

As we gather tonight, hundreds of thousands of American service men and women
are deployed across the world in the war on terror. By bringing hope to the
oppressed and delivering justice to the violent, they are making America more
secure.

Each day, law enforcement personnel and intelligence officers are tracking
terrorist threats; analysts are examining airline passenger lists; the men and
women of our new Homeland Security Department are patrolling our coasts and
borders. And their vigilance is protecting America.

Americans are proving once again to be the hardest working people in the world.
The American economy is growing stronger. The tax relief you passed is working.

Tonight Members of Congress can take pride in the great works of compassion and
reform that skeptics had thought impossible. You're raising the standards for
our public schools, and you are giving our senior citizens prescription drug
coverage under Medicare.

We have faced serious challenges together, and now we face a choice: We can go
forward with confidence and resolve, or we can turn back to the dangerous
illusion that terrorists are not plotting and outlaw regimes are no threat to
us. We can press on with economic growth and reforms in education and Medicare,
or we can turn back to old policies and old divisions.

We've not come all this way, through tragedy and trial and war, only to falter
and leave our work unfinished. Americans are rising to the tasks of history, and
they expect the same from us. In their efforts, their enterprise, and their
character, the American people are showing that the state of our Union is
confident and strong.

Our greatest responsibility is the active defense of the American people.
Twenty-eight months have passed since September the 11th, 2001-- over 2 years
without an attack on American soil. And it is tempting to believe that the
danger is behind us. That hope is understandable, comforting--and false. The
killing has continued in Bali, Jakarta, Casablanca, Riyadh, Mombasa, Jerusalem,
Istanbul, and Baghdad. The terrorists continue to plot against America and the
civilized world. And by our will and courage, this danger will be defeated.

Inside the United States, where the war began, we must continue to give our
homeland security and law enforcement personnel every tool they need to defend
us. And one of those essential tools is the PATRIOT Act, which allows Federal
law enforcement to better share information to track terrorists, to disrupt
their cells, and to seize their assets. For years, we have used similar
provisions to catch embezzlers and drug traffickers. If these methods are good
for hunting criminals, they are even more important for hunting terrorists.

Key provisions of the PATRIOT Act are set to expire next year. The terrorist
threat will not expire on that schedule. Our law enforcement needs this vital
legislation to protect our citizens. You need to renew the PATRIOT Act.

America is on the offensive against the terrorists who started this war. Last
March, Khalid Sheik Mohammed, a mastermind of September the 11th, awoke to find
himself in the custody of U.S. and Pakistani authorities. Last August the 11th
brought the capture of the terrorist Hambali, who was a key player in the attack
in Indonesia that killed over 200 people. We're tracking Al Qaida around the
world, and nearly two-thirds of their known leaders have now been captured or
killed. Thousands of very skilled and determined military personnel are on the
manhunt, going after the remaining killers who hide in cities and caves, and one
by one, we will bring these terrorists to justice.

As part of the offensive against terror, we are also confronting the regimes
that harbor and support terrorists and could supply them with nuclear, chemical,
or biological weapons. The United States and our allies are determined: We
refuse to live in the shadow of this ultimate danger.

The first to see our determination were the Taliban, who made Afghanistan the
primary training base of Al Qaida killers. As of this month, that country has a
new constitution guaranteeing free elections and full participation by women.
Businesses are opening. Health care centers are being established, and the boys
and girls of Afghanistan are back in school. With the help from the new Afghan
army, our coalition is leading aggressive raids against the surviving members of
the Taliban and Al Qaida. The men and women of Afghanistan are building a nation
that is free and proud and fighting terror, and America is honored to be their
friend.

Since we last met in this Chamber, combat forces of the United States, Great
Britain, Australia, Poland, and other countries enforced the demands of the
United Nations, ended the rule of Saddam Hussein, and the people of Iraq are
free.

Having broken the Ba'athist regime, we face a remnant of violent Saddam
supporters. Men who ran away from our troops in battle are now dispersed and
attack from the shadows. These killers, joined by foreign terrorists, are a
serious, continuing danger. Yet we're making progress against them. The once
all-powerful ruler of Iraq was found in a hole and now sits in a prison cell. Of
the top 55 officials of the former regime, we have captured or killed 45. Our
forces are on the offensive, leading over 1,600 patrols a day and conducting an
average of 180 raids a week. We are dealing with these thugs in Iraq just as
surely as we dealt with Saddam Hussein's evil regime.

The work of building a new Iraq is hard, and it is right. And America has always
been willing to do what it takes for what is right. Last January, Iraq's only
law was the whim of one brutal man. Today, our coalition is working with the
Iraqi Governing Council to draft a basic law with a bill of rights. We're
working with Iraqis and the United Nations to prepare for a transition to full
Iraqi sovereignty by the end of June.

As democracy takes hold in Iraq, the enemies of freedom will do all in their
power to spread violence and fear. They are trying to shake the will of our
country and our friends, but the United States of America will never be
intimidated by thugs and assassins. The killers will fail, and the Iraqi people
will live in freedom.

Month by month, Iraqis are assuming more responsibility for their own security
and their own future. And tonight we are honored to welcome one of Iraq's most
respected leaders, the current President of the Iraqi Governing Council, Adnan
Pachachi.

Sir, America stands with you and the Iraqi people as you build a free and
peaceful nation.

Because of American leadership and resolve, the world is changing for the
better. Last month, the leader of Libya voluntarily pledged to disclose and
dismantle all of his regime's weapons of mass destruction programs, including a
uranium enrichment project for nuclear weapons. Colonel Qadhafi correctly judged
that his country would be better off and far more secure without weapons of mass
murder.

Nine months of intense negotiations involving the United States and Great
Britain succeeded with Libya, while 12 years of diplomacy with Iraq did not. And
one reason is clear: For diplomacy to be effective, words must be credible, and
no one can now doubt the word of America.

Different threats require different strategies. Along with nations in the
region, we're insisting that North Korea eliminate its nuclear program. America
and the international community are demanding that Iran meet its commitments and
not develop nuclear weapons. America is committed to keeping the world's most
dangerous weapons out of the hands of the most dangerous regimes.

When I came to this rostrum on September the 20th, 2001, I brought the police
shield of a fallen officer, my reminder of lives that ended and a task that does
not end. I gave to you and to all Americans my complete commitment to securing
our country and defeating our enemies. And this pledge, given by one, has been
kept by many.

You in the Congress have provided the resources for our defense and cast the
difficult votes of war and peace. Our closest allies have been unwavering.
America's intelligence personnel and diplomats have been skilled and tireless.
And the men and women of the American military-- they have taken the hardest
duty. We've seen their skill and their courage in armored charges and midnight
raids and lonely hours on faithful watch. We have seen the joy when they return
and felt the sorrow when one is lost. I've had the honor of meeting our service
men and women at many posts, from the deck of a carrier in the Pacific to a mess
hall in Baghdad.

Many of our troops are listening tonight, and I want you and your families to
know: America is proud of you. And my administration and this Congress will give
you the resources you need to fight and win the war on terror.

I know that some people question if America is really in a war at all. They view
terrorism more as a crime, a problem to be solved mainly with law enforcement
and indictments. After the World Trade Center was first attacked in 1993, some
of the guilty were indicted and tried and convicted and sent to prison. But the
matter was not settled. The terrorists were still training and plotting in other
nations and drawing up more ambitious plans. After the chaos and carnage of
September the 11th, it is not enough to serve our enemies with legal papers. The
terrorists and their supporters declared war on the United States, and war is
what they got.

Some in this Chamber and in our country did not support the liberation of Iraq.
Objections to war often come from principled motives, but let us be candid about
the consequences of leaving Saddam Hussein in power. We're seeking all the
facts. Already, the Kay Report identified dozens of
weapons-of-mass-destruction-related program activities and significant amounts
of equipment that Iraq concealed from the United Nations. Had we failed to act,
the dictator's weapons of mass destruction programs would continue to this day.
Had we failed to act, Security Council resolutions on Iraq would have been
revealed as empty threats, weakening the United Nations and encouraging defiance
by dictators around the world. Iraq's torture chambers would still be filled
with victims, terrified and innocent. The killing fields of Iraq, where hundreds
of thousands of men and women and children vanished into the sands, would still
be known only to the killers. For all who love freedom and peace, the world
without Saddam Hussein's regime is a better and safer place.

Some critics have said our duties in Iraq must be internationalized. This
particular criticism is hard to explain to our partners in Britain, Australia,
Japan, South Korea, the Philippines, Thailand, Italy, Spain, Poland, Denmark,
Hungary, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Romania, the Netherlands, Norway, El Salvador, and
the 17 other countries that have committed troops to Iraq. As we debate at home,
we must never ignore the vital contributions of our international partners or
dismiss their sacrifices.

From the beginning, America has sought international support for our operations
in Afghanistan and Iraq, and we have gained much support. There is a difference,
however, between leading a coalition of many nations and submitting to the
objections of a few. America will never seek a permission slip to defend the
security of our country.

We also hear doubts that democracy is a realistic goal for the greater Middle
East, where freedom is rare. Yet it is mistaken and condescending to assume that
whole cultures and great religions are incompatible with liberty and
self-government. I believe that God has planted in every human heart the desire
to live in freedom. And even when that desire is crushed by tyranny for decades,
it will rise again.

As long as the Middle East remains a place of tyranny and despair and anger, it
will continue to produce men and movements that threaten the safety of America
and our friends. So America is pursuing a forward strategy of freedom in the
greater Middle East. We will challenge the enemies of reform, confront the
allies of terror, and expect a higher standard from our friend. To cut through
the barriers of hateful propaganda, the Voice of America and other broadcast
services are expanding their programming in Arabic and Persian, and soon a new
television service will begin providing reliable news and information across the
region. I will send you a proposal to double the budget of the National
Endowment for Democracy and to focus its new work on the development of free
elections and free markets, free press, and free labor unions in the Middle
East. And above all, we will finish the historic work of democracy in
Afghanistan and Iraq so those nations can light the way for others and help
transform a troubled part of the world.

America is a nation with a mission, and that mission comes from our most basic
beliefs. We have no desire to dominate, no ambitions of empire. Our aim is a
democratic peace, a peace founded upon the dignity and rights of every man and
woman. America acts in this cause with friends and allies at our side, yet we
understand our special calling: This great Republic will lead the cause of
freedom.

In the last 3 years, adversity has also revealed the fundamental strengths of
the American economy. We have come through recession and terrorist attack and
corporate scandals and the uncertainties of war. And because you acted to
stimulate our economy with tax relief, this economy is strong and growing
stronger.

You have doubled the child tax credit from 500 to $1,000, reduced the marriage
penalty, begun to phase out the death tax, reduced taxes on capital gains and
stock dividends, cut taxes on small businesses, and you have lowered taxes for
every American who pays income taxes.

Americans took those dollars and put them to work, driving this economy forward.
The pace of economic growth in the third quarter of 2003 was the fastest in
nearly 20 years; new home construction, the highest in almost 20 years;
homeownership rates, the highest ever. Manufacturing activity is increasing.
Inflation is low. Interest rates are low. Exports are growing. Productivity is
high, and jobs are on the rise. These numbers confirm that the American people
are using their money far better than Government would have, and you were right
to return it.

America's growing economy is also a changing economy. As technology transforms
the way almost every job is done, America becomes more productive, and workers
need new skills. Much of our job growth will be found in high-skilled fields
like health care and biotechnology. So we must respond by helping more Americans
gain the skills to find good jobs in our new economy.

All skills begin with the basics of reading and math, which are supposed to be
learned in the early grades of our schools. Yet for too long, for too many
children, those skills were never mastered. By passing the No Child Left Behind
Act, you have made the expectation of literacy the law of our country. We're
providing more funding for our schools, a 36-percent increase since 2001. We're
requiring higher standards. We are regularly testing every child on the
fundamentals. We are reporting results to parents and making sure they have
better options when schools are not performing. We are making progress toward
excellence for every child in America.

But the status quo always has defenders. Some want to undermine the No Child
Left Behind Act by weakening standards and accountability. Yet the results we
require are really a matter of common sense: We expect third graders to read and
do math at the third grade level, and that's not asking too much. Testing is the
only way to identify and help students who are falling behind. This Nation will
not go back to the days of simply shuffling children along from grade to grade
without them learning the basics. I refuse to give up on any child, and the No
Child Left Behind Act is opening the door of opportunity to all of America's
children.

At the same time, we must ensure that older students and adults can gain the
skills they need to find work now. Many of the fastest growing occupations
require strong math and science preparation and training beyond the high school
level. So tonight, I propose a series of measures called Jobs for the 21st
Century. This program will provide extra help to middle and high school students
who fall behind in reading and math, expand advanced placement programs in
low-income schools, invite math and science professionals from the private
sector to teach part-time in our high schools. I propose larger Pell grants for
students who prepare for college with demanding courses in high school. I
propose increasing our support for America's fine community colleges, so they
can--I do so, so they can train workers for industries that are creating the
most new jobs. By all these actions, we'll help more and more Americans to join
in the growing prosperity of our country. Job training is important, and so is
job creation. We must continue to pursue an aggressive, progrowth economic
agenda.

Congress has some unfinished business on the issue of taxes. The tax reductions
you passed are set to expire. Unless you act, the unfair tax on marriage will go
back up. Unless you act, millions of families will be charged $300 more in
Federal taxes for every child. Unless you act, small businesses will pay higher
taxes. Unless you act, the death tax will eventually come back to life. Unless
you act, Americans face a tax increase. What Congress has given, the Congress
should not take away. For the sake of job growth, the tax cuts you passed should
be permanent.

Our agenda for jobs and growth must help small-business owners and employees
with relief from needless Federal regulation and protect them from junk and
frivolous lawsuits.

Consumers and businesses need reliable supplies of energy to make our economy
run, so I urge you to pass legislation to modernize our electricity system,
promote conservation, and make America less dependent on foreign sources of
energy.

My administration is promoting free and fair trade to open up new markets for
America's entrepreneurs and manufacturers and farmers, to create jobs for
American workers. Younger workers should have the opportunity to build a nest
egg by saving part of their Social Security taxes in a personal retirement
account. We should make the Social Security system a source of ownership for the
American people. And we should limit the burden of Government on this economy by
acting as good stewards of taxpayers' dollars.

In 2 weeks, I will send you a budget that funds the war, protects the homeland,
and meets important domestic needs while limiting the growth in discretionary
spending to less than 4 percent. This will require that Congress focus on
priorities, cut wasteful spending, and be wise with the people's money. By doing
so, we can cut the deficit in half over the next 5 years.

Tonight I also ask you to reform our immigration laws so they reflect our values
and benefit our economy. I propose a new temporary- worker program to match
willing foreign workers with willing employers when no Americans can be found to
fill the job. This reform will be good for our economy because employers will
find needed workers in an honest and orderly system. A temporary-worker program
will help protect our homeland, allowing Border Patrol and law enforcement to
focus on true threats to our national security.

I oppose amnesty, because it would encourage further illegal immigration and
unfairly reward those who break our laws. My temporary- worker program will
preserve the citizenship path for those who respect the law while bringing
millions of hard-working men and women out from the shadows of American life.

Our Nation's health care system, like our economy, is also in a time of change.
Amazing medical technologies are improving and saving lives. This dramatic
progress has brought its own challenge, in the rising costs of medical care and
health insurance. Members of Congress, we must work together to help control
those costs and extend the benefits of modern medicine throughout our country.

Meeting these goals requires bipartisan effort, and 2 months ago, you showed the
way. By strengthening Medicare and adding a prescription drug benefit, you kept
a basic commitment to our seniors. You are giving them the modern medicine they
deserve.

Starting this year, under the law you passed, seniors can choose to receive a
drug discount card, saving them 10 to 25 percent off the retail price of most
prescription drugs, and millions of low-income seniors can get an additional
$600 to buy medicine. Beginning next year, seniors will have new coverage for
preventive screenings against diabetes and heart disease, and seniors just
entering Medicare can receive wellness exams.

In January of 2006, seniors can get prescription drug coverage under Medicare.
For a monthly premium of about $35, most seniors who do not have that coverage
today can expect to see their drug bills cut roughly in half. Under this reform,
senior citizens will be able to keep their Medicare just as it is, or they can
choose a Medicare plan that fits them best, just as you, as Members of Congress,
can choose an insurance plan that meets your needs. And starting this year,
millions of Americans will be able to save money tax-free for their medical
expenses in a health savings account.

I signed this measure proudly, and any attempt to limit the choices of our
seniors or to take away their prescription drug coverage under Medicare will
meet my veto.

On the critical issue of health care, our goal is to ensure that Americans can
choose and afford private health care coverage that best fits their individual
needs. To make insurance more affordable, Congress must act to address rapidly
rising health care costs. Small businesses should be able to band together and
negotiate for lower insurance rates, so they can cover more workers with health
insurance. I urge you to pass association health plans. I ask you to give lower
income Americans a refundable tax credit that would allow millions to buy their
own basic health insurance.

By computerizing health records, we can avoid dangerous medical mistakes, reduce
costs, and improve care. To protect the doctor-patient relationship and keep
good doctors doing good work, we must eliminate wasteful and frivolous medical
lawsuits. And tonight I propose that individuals who buy catastrophic health
care coverage as part of our new health savings accounts be allowed to deduct
100 percent of the premiums from their taxes.

A Government-run health care system is the wrong prescription. By keeping costs
under control, expanding access, and helping more Americans afford coverage, we
will preserve the system of private medicine that makes America's health care
the best in the world.

We are living in a time of great change in our world, in our economy, in science
and medicine. Yet some things endure: courage and compassion, reverence and
integrity, respect for differences of faith and race. The values we try to live
by never change, and they are instilled in us by fundamental institutions such
as families and schools and religious congregations. These institutions, these
unseen pillars of civilization, must remain strong in America, and we will
defend them. We must stand with our families to help them raise healthy,
responsible children. When it comes to helping children make right choices,
there is work for all of us to do.

One of the worst decisions our children can make is to gamble their lives and
futures on drugs. Our Government is helping parents confront this problem with
aggressive education, treatment, and law enforcement. Drug use in high school
has declined by 11 percent over the last 2 years. Four hundred thousand fewer
young people are using illegal drugs than in the year 2001. In my budget, I
propose new funding to continue our aggressive, community-based strategy to
reduce demand for illegal drugs. Drug testing in our schools has proven to be an
effective part of this effort. So tonight I propose an additional 23 million for
schools that want to use drug testing as a tool to save children's lives. The
aim here is not to punish children but to send them this message: We love you,
and we do not want to lose you.

To help children make right choices, they need good examples. Athletics play
such an important role in our society, but unfortunately, some in professional
sports are not setting much of an example. The use of performance-enhancing
drugs like steroids in baseball, football, and other sports is dangerous, and it
sends the wrong message, that there are shortcuts to accomplishment and that
performance is more important than character. So tonight I call on team owners,
union representatives, coaches, and players to take the lead, to send the right
signal, to get tough, and to get rid of steroids now.

To encourage right choices, we must be willing to confront the dangers young
people face, even when they're difficult to talk about. Each year, about 3
million teenagers contract sexually transmitted diseases that can harm them or
kill them or prevent them from ever becoming parents. In my budget, I propose a
grassroots campaign to help inform families about these medical risks. We will
double Federal funding for abstinence programs, so schools can teach this fact
of life: Abstinence for young people is the only certain way to avoid sexually
transmitted diseases.

Decisions children now make can affect their health and character for the rest
of their lives. All of us, parents and schools and government, must work
together to counter the negative influence of the culture and to send the right
messages to our children.

A strong America must also value the institution of marriage. I believe we
should respect individuals as we take a principled stand for one of the most
fundamental, enduring institutions of our civilization. Congress has already
taken a stand on this issue by passing the Defense of Marriage Act, signed in
1996 by President Clinton. That statute protects marriage under Federal law as a
union of a man and a woman and declares that one State may not redefine marriage
for other States.

Activist judges, however, have begun redefining marriage by court order, without
regard for the will of the people and their elected representatives. On an issue
of such great consequence, the people's voice must be heard. If judges insist on
forcing their arbitrary will upon the people, the only alternative left to the
people would be the constitutional process. Our Nation must defend the sanctity
of marriage.

The outcome of this debate is important, and so is the way we conduct it. The
same moral tradition that defines marriage also teaches that each individual has
dignity and value in God's sight.

It's also important to strengthen our communities by unleashing the compassion
of America's religious institutions. Religious charities of every creed are
doing some of the most vital work in our country: mentoring children, feeding
the hungry, taking the hand of the lonely. Yet Government has often denied
social service grants and contracts to these groups, just because they have a
cross or a Star of David or a crescent on the wall.

By Executive order, I have opened billions of dollars in grant money to
competition that includes faith-based charities. Tonight I ask you to codify
this into law, so people of faith can know that the law will never discriminate
against them again.

In the past, we've worked together to bring mentors to children of prisoners and
provide treatment for the addicted and help for the homeless. Tonight I ask you
to consider another group of Americans in need of help. This year, some 600,000
inmates will be released from prison back into society. We know from long
experience that if they can't find work or a home or help, they are much more
likely to commit crime and return to prison. So tonight I propose a 4-year, $300
million prisoner reentry initiative to expand job training and placement
services, to provide transitional housing, and to help newly released prisoners
get mentoring, including from faith-based groups. America is the land of second
chance, and when the gates of the prison open, the path ahead should lead to a
better life.

For all Americans, the last 3 years have brought tests we did not ask for and
achievements shared by all. By our actions, we have shown what kind of nation we
are. In grief, we have found the grace to go on. In challenge, we rediscovered
the courage and daring of a free people. In victory, we have shown the noble
aims and good heart of America. And having come this far, we sense that we live
in a time set apart.

I've been witness to the character of the people of America, who have shown calm
in times of danger, compassion for one another, and toughness for the long haul.
All of us have been partners in a great enterprise. And even some of the
youngest understand that we are living in historic times. Last month a girl in
Lincoln, Rhode Island, sent me a letter. It began, "Dear George W. Bush. If
there's anything you know I, Ashley Pearson, age 10, can do to help anyone,
please send me a letter and tell me what I can do to save our country." She
added this P.S.: "If you can send a letter to the troops, please put, 'Ashley
Pearson believes in you.' " Tonight, Ashley, your message to our troops has
just been conveyed. And yes, you have some duties yourself: Study hard in
school; listen to your mom or dad; help someone in need; and when you and your
friends see a man or woman in uniform, say, "Thank you." And Ashley, while you
do your part, all of us here in this great Chamber will do our best to keep you
and the rest of America safe and free.

My fellow citizens, we now move forward with confidence and faith. Our Nation is
strong and steadfast. The cause we serve is right, because it is the cause of
all mankind. The momentum of freedom in our world is unmistakable, and it is not
carried forward by our power alone. We can trust in that greater power who
guides the unfolding of the years. And in all that is to come, we can know that
His purposes are just and true.

May God continue to bless America.

Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, fellow citizens:

As a new Congress gathers, all of us in the elected branches of Government share
a great privilege: We've been placed in office by the votes of the people we
serve. And tonight that is a privilege we share with newly elected leaders of
Afghanistan, the Palestinian Territories, Ukraine, and a free and sovereign
Iraq.

Two weeks ago, I stood on the steps of this Capitol and renewed the commitment
of our Nation to the guiding ideal of liberty for all. This evening I will set
forth policies to advance that ideal at home and around the world.

Tonight, with a healthy, growing economy, with more Americans going back to
work, with our Nation an active force for good in the world, the state of our
Union is confident and strong.

Our generation has been blessed by the expansion of opportunity, by advances in
medicine, by the security purchased by our parents' sacrifice. Now, as we see a
little gray in the mirror--or a lot of gray--[laughter]--and we watch our
children moving into adulthood, we ask the question: What will be the state of
their Union? Members of Congress, the choices we make together will answer that
question. Over the next several months, on issue after issue, let us do what
Americans have always done and build a better world for our children and our
grandchildren.

First, we must be good stewards of this economy and renew the great institutions
on which millions of our fellow citizens rely. America's economy is the fastest
growing of any major industrialized nation. In the past 4 years, we've provided
tax relief to every person who pays income taxes, overcome a recession, opened
up new markets abroad, prosecuted corporate criminals, raised homeownership to
its highest level in history. And in the last year alone, the United States has
added 2.3 million new jobs. When action was needed, the Congress delivered, and
the Nation is grateful.

Now we must add to these achievements. By making our economy more flexible, more
innovative, and more competitive, we will keep America the economic leader of
the world.

America's prosperity requires restraining the spending appetite of the Federal
Government. I welcome the bipartisan enthusiasm for spending discipline. I will
send you a budget that holds the growth of discretionary spending below
inflation, makes tax relief permanent, and stays on track to cut the deficit in
half by 2009. My budget substantially reduces or eliminates more than 150
Government programs that are not getting results or duplicate current efforts or
do not fulfill essential priorities. The principle here is clear: Taxpayer
dollars must be spent wisely or not at all.

To make our economy stronger and more dynamic, we must prepare a rising
generation to fill the jobs of the 21st century. Under the No Child Left Behind
Act, standards are higher, test scores are on the rise, and we're closing the
achievement gap for minority students. Now we must demand better results from
our high schools, so every high school diploma is a ticket to success. We will
help an additional 200,000 workers to get training for a better career by
reforming our job training system and strengthening America's community
colleges. And we'll make it easier for Americans to afford a college education
by increasing the size of Pell grants.

To make our economy stronger and more competitive, America must reward, not
punish, the efforts and dreams of entrepreneurs. Small business is the path of
advancement, especially for women and minorities, so we must free small
businesses from needless regulation and protect honest job-creators from junk
lawsuits. Justice is distorted and our economy is held back by irresponsible
class actions and frivolous asbestos claims, and I urge Congress to pass legal
reforms this year.

To make our economy stronger and more productive, we must make health care more
affordable and give families greater access to good coverage and more control
over their health decisions. I ask Congress to move forward on a comprehensive
health care agenda with tax credits to help low-income workers buy insurance, a
community health center in every poor county, improved information technology to
prevent medical error and needless costs, association health plans for small
businesses and their employees, expanded health savings accounts, and medical
liability reform that will reduce health care costs and make sure patients have
the doctors and care they need.

To keep our economy growing, we also need reliable supplies of affordable,
environmentally responsible energy. Nearly 4 years ago, I submitted a
comprehensive energy strategy that encourages conservation, alternative sources,
a modernized electricity grid, and more production here at home, including safe,
clean nuclear energy. My Clear Skies legislation will cut powerplant pollution
and improve the health of our citizens. And my budget provides strong funding
for leading-edge technology, from hydrogen-fueled cars to clean coal to
renewable sources such as ethanol. Four years of debate is enough. I urge
Congress to pass legislation that makes America more secure and less dependent
on foreign energy.

All these proposals are essential to expand this economy and add new jobs, but
they are just the beginning of our duty. To build the prosperity of future
generations, we must update institutions that were created to meet the needs of
an earlier time. Year after year, Americans are burdened by an archaic,
incoherent Federal Tax Code. I've appointed a bipartisan panel to examine the
Tax Code from top to bottom. And when their recommendations are delivered, you
and I will work together to give this Nation a Tax Code that is progrowth, easy
to understand, and fair to all.

America's immigration system is also outdated, unsuited to the needs of our
economy and to the values of our country. We should not be content with laws
that punish hardworking people who want only to provide for their families and
deny businesses willing workers and invite chaos at our border. It is time for
an immigration policy that permits temporary guest workers to fill jobs
Americans will not take, that rejects amnesty, that tells us who is entering and
leaving our country, and that closes the border to drug dealers and terrorists.

One of America's most important institutions, a symbol of the trust between
generations, is also in need of wise and effective reform. Social Security was a
great moral success of the 20th century, and we must honor its great purposes in
this new century. The system, however, on its current path, is headed toward
bankruptcy. And so we must join together to strengthen and save Social Security.

Today, more than 45 million Americans receive Social Security benefits, and
millions more are nearing retirement. And for them the system is sound and
fiscally strong. I have a message for every American who is 55 or older: Do not
let anyone mislead you; for you, the Social Security system will not change in
any way.

For younger workers, the Social Security system has serious problems that will
grow worse with time. Social Security was created decades ago for a very
different era. In those days, people did not live as long. Benefits were much
lower than they are today. And a half century ago, about 16 workers paid into
the system for each person drawing benefits.

Our society has changed in ways the founders of Social Security could not have
foreseen. In today's world, people are living longer and, therefore, drawing
benefits longer. And those benefits are scheduled to rise dramatically over the
next few decades. And instead of 16 workers paying in for every beneficiary,
right now it's only about 3 workers. And over the next few decades, that number
will fall to just 2 workers per beneficiary. With each passing year, fewer
workers are paying ever- higher benefits to an ever-larger number of retirees.

So here is the result: Thirteen years from now, in 2018, Social Security will be
paying out more than it takes in. And every year afterward will bring a new
shortfall, bigger than the year before. For example, in the year 2027, the
Government will somehow have to come up with an extra $200 billion to keep the
system afloat, and by 2033, the annual shortfall would be more than $300
billion. By the year 2042, the entire system would be exhausted and bankrupt. If
steps are not taken to avert that outcome, the only solutions would be
dramatically higher taxes, massive new borrowing, or sudden and severe cuts in
Social Security benefits or other Government programs.

I recognize that 2018 and 2042 may seem a long way off. But those dates are not
so distant, as any parent will tell you. If you have a 5- year-old, you're
already concerned about how you'll pay for college tuition 13 years down the
road. If you've got children in their twenties, as some of us do, the idea of
Social Security collapsing before they retire does not seem like a small matter.
And it should not be a small matter to the United States Congress. You and I
share a responsibility. We must pass reforms that solve the financial problems
of Social Security once and for all.

Fixing Social Security permanently will require an open, candid review of the
options. Some have suggested limiting benefits for wealthy retirees. Former
Congressman Tim Penny has raised the possibility of indexing benefits to prices
rather than wages. During the 1990s, my predecessor, President Clinton, spoke of
increasing the retirement age. Former Senator John Breaux suggested discouraging
early collection of Social Security benefits. The late Senator Daniel Patrick
Moynihan recommended changing the way benefits are calculated. All these ideas
are on the table.

I know that none of these reforms would be easy. But we have to move ahead with
courage and honesty, because our children's retirement security is more
important than partisan politics. I will work with Members of Congress to find
the most effective combination of reforms. I will listen to anyone who has a
good idea to offer. We must, however, be guided by some basic principles. We
must make Social Security permanently sound, not leave that task for another
day. We must not jeopardize our economic strength by increasing payroll taxes.
We must ensure that lower income Americans get the help they need to have
dignity and peace of mind in their retirement. We must guarantee there is no
change for those now retired or nearing retirement. And we must take care that
any changes in the system are gradual, so younger workers have years to prepare
and plan for their future.

As we fix Social Security, we also have the responsibility to make the system a
better deal for younger workers. And the best way to reach that goal is through
voluntary personal retirement accounts. Here is how the idea works. Right now, a
set portion of the money you earn is taken out of your paycheck to pay for the
Social Security benefits of today's retirees. If you're a younger worker, I
believe you should be able to set aside part of that money in your own
retirement account, so you can build a nest egg for your own future.

Here's why the personal accounts are a better deal. Your money will grow over
time at a greater rate than anything the current system can deliver, and your
account will provide money for retirement over and above the check you will
receive from Social Security. In addition, you'll be able to pass along the
money that accumulates in your personal account, if you wish, to your children
and--or grandchildren. And best of all, the money in the account is yours, and
the Government can never take it away.

The goal here is greater security in retirement, so we will set careful
guidelines for personal accounts. We'll make sure the money can only go into a
conservative mix of bonds and stock funds. We'll make sure that your earnings
are not eaten up by hidden Wall Street fees. We'll make sure there are good
options to protect your investments from sudden market swings on the eve of your
retirement. We'll make sure a personal account cannot be emptied out all at once
but rather paid out over time as an addition to traditional Social Security
benefits. And we'll make sure this plan is fiscally responsible by starting
personal retirement accounts gradually and raising the yearly limits on
contributions over time, eventually permitting all workers to set aside 4
percentage points of their payroll taxes in their accounts.

Personal retirement accounts should be familiar to Federal employees, because
you already have something similar called the Thrift Savings Plan, which lets
workers deposit a portion of their paychecks into any of five different broadly
based investment funds. It's time to extend the same security and choice and
ownership to young Americans.

Our second great responsibility to our children and grandchildren is to honor
and to pass along the values that sustain a free society. So many of my
generation, after a long journey, have come home to family and faith and are
determined to bring up responsible, moral children. Government is not the source
of these values, but Government should never undermine them.

Because marriage is a sacred institution and the foundation of society, it
should not be redefined by activist judges. For the good of families, children,
and society, I support a constitutional amendment to protect the institution of
marriage.

Because a society is measured by how it treats the weak and vulnerable, we must
strive to build a culture of life. Medical research can help us reach that goal
by developing treatments and cures that save lives and help people overcome
disabilities, and I thank the Congress for doubling the funding of the National
Institutes of Health.

To build a culture of life, we must also ensure that scientific advances always
serve human dignity, not take advantage of some lives for the benefit of others.
We should all be able to agree on some clear standards. I will work with
Congress to ensure that human embryos are not created for experimentation or
grown for body parts and that human life is never bought or sold as a commodity.
America will continue to lead the world in medical research that is ambitious,
aggressive, and always ethical.

Because courts must always deliver impartial justice, judges have a duty to
faithfully interpret the law, not legislate from the bench. As President, I have
a constitutional responsibility to nominate men and women who understand the
role of courts in our democracy and are well- qualified to serve on the bench,
and I have done so. The Constitution also gives the Senate a responsibility:
Every judicial nominee deserves an up-or-down vote.

Because one of the deepest values of our country is compassion, we must never
turn away from any citizen who feels isolated from the opportunities of America.
Our Government will continue to support faith-based and community groups that
bring hope to harsh places. Now we need to focus on giving young people,
especially young men in our cities, better options than apathy or gangs or jail.
Tonight I propose a 3-year initiative to help organizations keep young people
out of gangs and show young men an ideal of manhood that respects women and
rejects violence. Taking on gang life will be one part of a broader outreach to
at-risk youth, which involves parents and pastors, coaches and community leaders
in programs ranging from literacy to sports. And I am proud that the leader of
this nationwide effort will be our First Lady, Laura Bush.

Because HIV/AIDS brings suffering and fear into so many lives, I ask you to
reauthorize the Ryan White Act to encourage prevention and provide care and
treatment to the victims of that disease. And as we update this important law,
we must focus our efforts on fellow citizens with the highest rates of new
cases, African American men and women.

Because one of the main sources of our national unity is our belief in equal
justice, we need to make sure Americans of all races and backgrounds have
confidence in the system that provides justice. In America, we must make doubly
sure no person is held to account for a crime he or she did not commit, so we
are dramatically expanding the use of DNA evidence to prevent wrongful
conviction. Soon I will send to Congress a proposal to fund special training for
defense counsel in capital cases, because people on trial for their lives must
have competent lawyers by their side.

Our third responsibility to future generations is to leave them an America that
is safe from danger and protected by peace. We will pass along to our children
all the freedoms we enjoy, and chief among them is freedom from fear.

In the 3\1/2\ years since September the 11th, 2001, we have taken unprecedented
actions to protect Americans. We've created a new Department of Government to
defend our homeland, focused the FBI on preventing terrorism, begun to reform
our intelligence agencies, broken up terror cells across the country, expanded
research on defenses against biological and chemical attack, improved border
security, and trained more than a half million first-responders. Police and
firefighters, air marshals, researchers, and so many others are working every
day to make our homeland safer, and we thank them all.

Our Nation, working with allies and friends, has also confronted the enemy
abroad with measures that are determined, successful, and continuing. The Al
Qaida terror network that attacked our country still has leaders, but many of
its top commanders have been removed. There are still governments that sponsor
and harbor terrorists, but their number has declined. There are still regimes
seeking weapons of mass destruction but no longer without attention and without
consequence. Our country is still the target of terrorists who want to kill many
and intimidate us all, and we will stay on the offensive against them until the
fight is won.

Pursuing our enemies is a vital commitment of the war on terror, and I thank the
Congress for providing our service men and women with the resources they have
needed. During this time of war, we must continue to support our military and
give them the tools for victory.

Other nations around the globe have stood with us. In Afghanistan, an
international force is helping provide security. In Iraq, 28 countries have
troops on the ground, the United Nations and the European Union provided
technical assistance for the elections, and NATO is leading a mission to help
train Iraqi officers. We're cooperating with 60 governments in the Proliferation
Security Initiative to detect and stop the transit of dangerous materials. We're
working closely with the governments in Asia to convince North Korea to abandon
its nuclear ambitions. Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and nine other countries have
captured or detained Al Qaida terrorists. In the next 4 years, my administration
will continue to build the coalitions that will defeat the dangers of our time.

In the long term, the peace we seek will only be achieved by eliminating the
conditions that feed radicalism and ideologies of murder. If whole regions of
the world remain in despair and grow in hatred, they will be the recruiting
grounds for terror, and that terror will stalk America and other free nations
for decades. The only force powerful enough to stop the rise of tyranny and
terror and replace hatred with hope is the force of human freedom. Our enemies
know this, and that is why the terrorist Zarqawi recently declared war on what
he called the "evil principle" of democracy. And we've declared our own
intention: America will stand with the allies of freedom to support democratic
movements in the Middle East and beyond, with the ultimate goal of ending
tyranny in our world.

The United States has no right, no desire, and no intention to impose our form
of government on anyone else. That is one of the main differences between us and
our enemies. They seek to impose and expand an empire of oppression in which a
tiny group of brutal, self-appointed rulers control every aspect of every life.
Our aim is to build and preserve a community of free and independent nations,
with governments that answer to their citizens and reflect their own cultures.
And because democracies respect their own people and their neighbors, the
advance of freedom will lead to peace.

That advance has great momentum in our time, shown by women voting in
Afghanistan and Palestinians choosing a new direction and the people of Ukraine
asserting their democratic rights and electing a President. We are witnessing
landmark events in the history of liberty, and in the coming years, we will add
to that story.

The beginnings of reform and democracy in the Palestinian territories are now
showing the power of freedom to break old patterns of violence and failure.
Tomorrow morning Secretary of State Rice departs on a trip that will take her to
Israel and the West Bank for meetings with Prime Minister Sharon and President
Abbas. She will discuss with them how we and our friends can help the
Palestinian people end terror and build the institutions of a peaceful,
independent, democratic state. To promote this democracy, I will ask Congress
for $350 million to support Palestinian political, economic, and security
reforms. The goal of two democratic states, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace is within reach, and America will help them achieve that goal.

To promote peace and stability in the broader Middle East, the United States
will work with our friends in the region to fight the common threat of terror,
while we encourage a higher standard of freedom. Hopeful reform is already
taking hold in an arc from Morocco to Jordan to Bahrain. The Government of Saudi
Arabia can demonstrate its leadership in the region by expanding the role of its
people in determining their future. And the great and proud nation of Egypt,
which showed the way toward peace in the Middle East, can now show the way
toward democracy in the Middle East.

To promote peace in the broader Middle East, we must confront regimes that
continue to harbor terrorists and pursue weapons of mass murder. Syria still
allows its territory and parts of Lebanon to be used by terrorists who seek to
destroy every chance of peace in the region. You have passed and we are applying
the Syrian Accountability Act, and we expect the Syrian Government to end all
support for terror and open the door to freedom. Today, Iran remains the world's
primary state sponsor of terror, pursuing nuclear weapons while depriving its
people of the freedom they seek and deserve. We are working with European allies
to make clear to the Iranian regime that it must give up its uranium enrichment
program and any plutonium reprocessing and end its support for terror. And to
the Iranian people, I say tonight: As you stand for your own liberty, America
stands with you.

Our generational commitment to the advance of freedom, especially in the Middle
East, is now being tested and honored in Iraq. That country is a vital front in
the war on terror, which is why the terrorists have chosen to make a stand
there. Our men and women in uniform are fighting terrorists in Iraq so we do not
have to face them here at home. And the victory of freedom in Iraq will
strengthen a new ally in the war on terror, inspire democratic reformers from
Damascus to Tehran, bring more hope and progress to a troubled region, and
thereby lift a terrible threat from the lives of our children and grandchildren.

We will succeed because the Iraqi people value their own liberty, as they showed
the world last Sunday. Across Iraq, often at great risk, millions of citizens
went to the polls and elected 275 men and women to represent them in a new
Transitional National Assembly. A young woman in Baghdad told of waking to the
sound of mortar fire on election day and wondering if it might be too dangerous
to vote. She said, "Hearing those explosions, it occurred to me: The insurgents
are weak; they are afraid of democracy; they are losing. So I got my husband and
I got my parents, and we all came out and voted together." Americans recognize
that spirit of liberty, because we share it. In any nation, casting your vote is
an act of civic responsibility. For millions of Iraqis, it was also an act of
personal courage, and they have earned the respect of us all.

One of Iraq's leading democracy and human rights advocates is Safia Taleb
al-Suhail. She says of her country, "We were occupied for 35 years by Saddam
Hussein. That was the real occupation. Thank you to the American people who paid
the cost but, most of all, to the soldiers." Eleven years ago, Safia's father
was assassinated by Saddam's intelligence service. Three days ago in Baghdad,
Safia was finally able to vote for the leaders of her country, and we are
honored that she is with us tonight.

The terrorists and insurgents are violently opposed to democracy and will
continue to attack it. Yet, the terrorists' most powerful myth is being
destroyed. The whole world is seeing that the car bombers and assassins are not
only fighting coalition forces; they are trying to destroy the hopes of Iraqis,
expressed in free elections. And the whole world now knows that a small group of
extremists will not overturn the will of the Iraqi people.

We will succeed in Iraq because Iraqis are determined to fight for their own
freedom and to write their own history. As Prime Minister Allawi said in his
speech to Congress last September, "Ordinary Iraqis are anxious to shoulder all
the security burdens of our country as quickly as possible." That is the
natural desire of an independent nation, and it is also the stated mission of
our coalition in Iraq. The new political situation in Iraq opens a new phase of
our work in that country.

At the recommendation of our commanders on the ground and in consultation with
the Iraqi Government, we will increasingly focus our efforts on helping prepare
more capable Iraqi security forces, forces with skilled officers and an
effective command structure. As those forces become more self-reliant and take
on greater security responsibilities, America and its coalition partners will
increasingly be in a supporting role. In the end, Iraqis must be able to defend
their own country, and we will help that proud new nation secure its liberty.

Recently an Iraqi interpreter said to a reporter, "Tell America not to abandon
us." He and all Iraqis can be certain: While our military strategy is adapting
to circumstances, our commitment remains firm and unchanging. We are standing
for the freedom of our Iraqi friends, and freedom in Iraq will make America
safer for generations to come. We will not set an artificial timetable for
leaving Iraq, because that would embolden the terrorists and make them believe
they can wait us out. We are in Iraq to achieve a result, a country that is
democratic, representative of all its people, at peace with its neighbors, and
able to defend itself. And when that result is achieved, our men and women
serving in Iraq will return home with the honor they have earned.

Right now, Americans in uniform are serving at posts across the world, often
taking great risks on my orders. We have given them training and equipment, and
they have given us an example of idealism and character that makes every
American proud. The volunteers of our military are unrelenting in battle,
unwavering in loyalty, unmatched in honor and decency, and every day they're
making our Nation more secure. Some of our service men and women have survived
terrible injuries, and this grateful country will do everything we can to help
them recover. And we have said farewell to some very good men and women who died
for our freedom and whose memory this Nation will honor forever.

One name we honor is Marine Corps Sergeant Byron Norwood of Pflugerville, Texas,
who was killed during the assault on Fallujah. His mom, Janet, sent me a letter
and told me how much Byron loved being a marine and how proud he was to be on
the frontline against terror. She wrote, "When Byron was home the last time, I
said that I wanted to protect him like I had since he was born. He just hugged
me and said, 'You've done your job, Mom. Now it is my turn to protect you.' "
Ladies and gentlemen, with grateful hearts we honor freedom's defenders and our
military families, represented here this evening by Sergeant Norwood's mom and
dad, Janet and Bill Norwood.

[At this point, in the First Lady's box, guest Safia Taleb al-Suhail embraced
guest Janet Norwood.]

In these 4 years, Americans have seen the unfolding of large events. We have
known times of sorrow and hours of uncertainty and days of victory. In all this
history, even when we have disagreed, we have seen threads of purpose that unite
us. The attack on freedom in our world has reaffirmed our confidence in
freedom's power to change the world. We are all part of a great venture: To
extend the promise of freedom in our country, to renew the values that sustain
our liberty, and to spread the peace that freedom brings.

As Franklin Roosevelt once reminded Americans, "Each age is a dream that is
dying, or one that is coming to birth." And we live in the country where the
biggest dreams are born. The abolition of slavery was only a dream until it was
fulfilled. The liberation of Europe from fascism was only a dream until it was
achieved. The fall of imperial communism was only a dream until, one day, it was
accomplished. Our generation has dreams of its own, and we also go forward with
confidence. The road of providence is uneven and unpredictable, yet we know
where it leads: It leads to freedom.

Thank you, and may God bless America.

Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, members of the Supreme
Court and Diplomatic Corps, distinguished guests and fellow citizens:

Today our Nation lost a beloved, graceful, courageous woman who called America
to its founding ideals and carried on a noble dream. Tonight we are comforted by
the hope of a glad reunion with the husband who was taken from her so long ago,
and we are grateful for the good life of Coretta Scott King.

Every time I am invited to this rostrum, I am humbled by the privilege, and
mindful of the history we have seen together. We have gathered under this
Capitol dome in moments of national mourning and national achievement. We have
served America through one of the most consequential periods of our history, and
it has been my honor to serve with you.

In a system of two parties, two chambers, and two elected branches, there will
always be differences and debate. But even tough debates can be conducted in a
civil tone, and our differences cannot be allowed to harden into anger. To
confront the great issues before us, we must act in a spirit of good will and
respect for one another, and I will do my part. Tonight the state of our Union
is strong, and together we will make it stronger.

In this decisive year, you and I will make choices that determine both the
future and the character of our country. We will choose to act confidently in
pursuing the enemies of freedom, or retreat from our duties in the hope of an
easier life. We will choose to build our prosperity by leading the world
economy, or shut ourselves off from trade and opportunity. In a complex and
challenging time, the road of isolationism and protectionism may seem broad and
inviting, yet it ends in danger and decline. The only way to protect our people,
the only way to secure the peace, the only way to control our destiny is by our
leadership, so the United States of America will continue to lead.

Abroad, our Nation is committed to a historic, long-term goal. We seek the end
of tyranny in our world. Some dismiss that goal as misguided idealism. In
reality, the future security of America depends on it. On September 11, 2001, we
found that problems originating in a failed and oppressive state 7,000 miles
away could bring murder and destruction to our country. Dictatorships shelter
terrorists, feed resentment and radicalism, and seek weapons of mass
destruction. Democracies replace resentment with hope, respect the rights of
their citizens and their neighbors, and join the fight against terror. Every
step toward freedom in the world makes our country safer, and so we will act
boldly in freedom's cause.

Far from being a hopeless dream, the advance of freedom is the great story of
our time. In 1945, there were about two dozen lonely democracies in the world.
Today, there are 122. And we are writing a new chapter in the story of
self-government, with women lining up to vote in Afghanistan, and millions of
Iraqis marking their liberty with purple ink, and men and women from Lebanon to
Egypt debating the rights of individuals and the necessity of freedom. At the
start of 2006, more than half the people of our world live in democratic
nations. And we do not forget the other half, in places like Syria, Burma,
Zimbabwe, North Korea, and Iran, because the demands of justice, and the peace
of this world, require their freedom as well.

No one can deny the success of freedom, but some men rage and fight against it.
And one of the main sources of reaction and opposition is radical Islam, the
perversion by a few of a noble faith into an ideology of terror and death.
Terrorists like bin Laden are serious about mass murder, and all of us must take
their declared intentions seriously. They seek to impose a heartless system of
totalitarian control throughout the Middle East and arm themselves with weapons
of mass murder. Their aim is to seize power in Iraq and use it as a safe haven
to launch attacks against America and the world. Lacking the military strength
to challenge us directly, the terrorists have chosen the weapon of fear. When
they murder children at a school in Beslan, or blow up commuters in London, or
behead a bound captive, the terrorists hope these horrors will break our will,
allowing the violent to inherit the Earth. But they have miscalculated: we love
our freedom, and we will fight to keep it.

In a time of testing, we cannot find security by abandoning our commitments and
retreating within our borders. If we were to leave these vicious attackers
alone, they would not leave us alone. They would simply move the battlefield to
our own shores. There is no peace in retreat. And there is no honor in retreat.
By allowing radical Islam to work its will, by leaving an assaulted world to
fend for itself, we would signal to all that we no longer believe in our own
ideals, or even in our own courage. But our enemies and our friends can be
certain: the United States will not retreat from the world, and we will never
surrender to evil.

America rejects the false comfort of isolationism. We are the Nation that saved
liberty in Europe, and liberated death camps, and helped raise up democracies,
and faced down an evil empire. Once again, we accept the call of history to
deliver the oppressed, and move this world toward peace.

We remain on the offensive against terror networks. We have killed or captured
many of their leaders. And for the others, their day will come. We remain on the
offensive in Afghanistan, where a fine president and national assembly are
fighting terror while building the institutions of a new democracy.

And we are on the offensive in Iraq, with a clear plan for victory. First, we
are helping Iraqis build an inclusive government, so that old resentments will
be eased and the insurgency will be marginalized. Second, we are continuing
reconstruction efforts and helping the Iraqi government to fight corruption and
build a modern economy, so all Iraqis can experience the benefits of freedom.
Third, we are striking terrorist targets while we train Iraqi forces that are
increasingly capable of defeating the enemy. Iraqis are showing their courage
every day, and we are proud to be their allies in the cause of freedom.

Our work in Iraq is difficult because our enemy is brutal. But that brutality
has not stopped the dramatic progress of a new democracy. In less than 3 years,
that nation has gone from dictatorship, to liberation, to sovereignty, to a
constitution, to national elections. At the same time, our coalition has been
relentless in shutting off terrorist infiltration, clearing out insurgent
strongholds, and turning over territory to Iraqi security forces. I am confident
in our plan for victory. I am confident in the will of the Iraqi people. I am
confident in the skill and spirit of our military. Fellow citizens, we are in
this fight to win, and we are winning.

The road of victory is the road that will take our troops home. As we make
progress on the ground, and Iraqi forces increasingly take the lead, we should
be able to further decrease our troop levels; but those decisions will be made
by our military commanders, not by politicians in Washington, D.C.

Our coalition has learned from our experience in Iraq. We have adjusted our
military tactics and changed our approach to reconstruction. Along the way, we
have benefited from responsible criticism and counsel offered by Members of
Congress of both parties. In the coming year, I will continue to reach out and
seek your good advice.

Yet there is a difference between responsible criticism that aims for success
and defeatism that refuses to acknowledge anything but failure. Hindsight alone
is not wisdom. And second-guessing is not a strategy.

With so much in the balance, those of us in public office have a duty to speak
with candor. A sudden withdrawal of our forces from Iraq would abandon our Iraqi
allies to death and prison, put men like bin Laden and Zarqawi in charge of a
strategic country, and show that a pledge from America means little. Members of
Congress: however we feel about the decisions and debates of the past, our
Nation has only one option: we must keep our word, defeat our enemies, and stand
behind the American military in its vital mission.

Our men and women in uniform are making sacrifices and showing a sense of duty
stronger than all fear. They know what it is like to fight house to house in a
maze of streets, to wear heavy gear in the desert heat, to see a comrade killed
by a roadside bomb. And those who know the costs also know the stakes. Marine
Staff Sergeant Dan Clay was killed last month fighting in Fallujah. He left
behind a letter to his family, but his words could just as well be addressed to
every American. Here is what Dan wrote: "I know what honor is. It has been an
honor to protect and serve all of you. I faced death with the secure knowledge
that you would not have to. Never falter. Don't hesitate to honor and support
those of us who have the honor of protecting that which is worth protecting."

Staff Sergeant Dan Clay's wife, Lisa, and his mom and dad, Sara Jo and Bud, are
with us this evening. Welcome. Our Nation is grateful to the fallen, who live in
the memory of our country. We are grateful to all who volunteer to wear our
Nation's uniform; and as we honor our brave troops, let us never forget the
sacrifices of America's military families.

Our offensive against terror involves more than military action. Ultimately, the
only way to defeat the terrorists is to defeat their dark vision of hatred and
fear by offering the hopeful alternative of political freedom and peaceful
change. So the United States of America supports democratic reform across the
broader Middle East. Elections are vital, but they are only the beginning.
Raising up a democracy requires the rule of law, protection of minorities, and
strong, accountable institutions that last longer than a single vote. The great
people of Egypt have voted in a multiparty presidential election, and now their
government should open paths of peaceful opposition that will reduce the appeal
of radicalism. The Palestinian people have voted in elections, and now the
leaders of Hamas must recognize Israel, disarm, reject terrorism, and work for
lasting peace. Saudi Arabia has taken the first steps of reform. Now it can
offer its people a better future by pressing forward with those efforts.

Democracies in the Middle East will not look like our own, because they will
reflect the traditions of their own citizens. Yet liberty is the future of every
nation in the Middle East, because liberty is the right and hope of all
humanity.

The same is true of Iran, a nation now held hostage by a small clerical elite
that is isolating and repressing its people. The regime in that country sponsors
terrorists in the Palestinian territories and in Lebanon, and that must come to
an end. The Iranian government is defying the world with its nuclear ambitions,
and the nations of the world must not permit the Iranian regime to gain nuclear
weapons. America will continue to rally the world to confront these threats. And
tonight, let me speak directly to the citizens of Iran: America respects you,
and we respect your country. We respect your right to choose your own future and
win your own freedom. And our Nation hopes one day to be the closest of friends
with a free and democratic Iran.

To overcome dangers in our world, we must also take the offensive by encouraging
economic progress, fighting disease, and spreading hope in hopeless lands.
Isolationism would not only tie our hands in fighting enemies; it would keep us
from helping our friends in desperate need. We show compassion abroad because
Americans believe in the God-given dignity and worth of a villager with
HIV/AIDS, or an infant with malaria, or a refugee fleeing genocide, or a young
girl sold into slavery. We also show compassion abroad because regions
overwhelmed by poverty, corruption, and despair are sources of terrorism,
organized crime, human trafficking, and the drug trade.

In recent years, you and I have taken unprecedented action to fight AIDS and
malaria, expand the education of girls, and reward developing nations that are
moving forward with economic and political reform. For people everywhere, the
United States is a partner for a better life. Shortchanging these efforts would
increase the suffering and chaos of our world, undercut our long-term security,
and dull the conscience of our country. I urge Members of Congress to serve the
interests of America by showing the compassion of America.

Our country must also remain on the offensive against terrorism here at home.
The enemy has not lost the desire or capability to attack us. Fortunately, this
Nation has superb professionals in law enforcement, intelligence, the military,
and homeland security. These men and women are dedicating their lives to
protecting us all, and they deserve our support and our thanks. They also
deserve the same tools they already use to fight drug trafficking and organized
crime, so I ask you to reauthorize the PATRIOT Act.

It is said that prior to the attacks of September 11, our government failed to
connect the dots of the conspiracy. We now know that two of the hijackers in the
United States placed telephone calls to al Qaeda operatives overseas. But we did
not know about their plans until it was too late. So to prevent another attack,
based on authority given to me by the Constitution and by statute, I have
authorized a terrorist surveillance program to aggressively pursue the
international communications of suspected al Qaeda operatives and affiliates to
and from America. Previous Presidents have used the same constitutional
authority I have, and Federal courts have approved the use of that authority.
Appropriate Members of Congress have been kept informed. This terrorist
surveillance program has helped prevent terrorist attacks. It remains essential
to the security of America. If there are people inside our country who are
talking with al Qaeda, we want to know about it, because we will not sit back
and wait to be hit again.

In all these areas, from the disruption of terror networks, to victory in Iraq,
to the spread of freedom and hope in troubled regions, we need the support of
our friends and allies. To draw that support, we must always be clear in our
principles and willing to act. The only alternative to American leadership is a
dramatically more dangerous and anxious world. Yet we also choose to lead
because it is a privilege to serve the values that gave us birth. American
leaders, from Roosevelt to Truman to Kennedy to Reagan, rejected isolation and
retreat because they knew that America is always more secure when freedom is on
the march. Our own generation is in a long war against a determined enemy, a war
that will be fought by Presidents of both parties, who will need steady
bipartisan support from the Congress. And tonight I ask for yours. Together, let
us protect our country, support the men and women who defend us, and lead this
world toward freedom.

Here at home, America also has a great opportunity: we will build the prosperity
of our country by strengthening our economic leadership in the world.

Our economy is healthy and vigorous and growing faster than other major
industrialized nations. In the last 2\1/2\ years, America has created 4.6
million new jobs, more than Japan and the European Union combined. Even in the
face of higher energy prices and natural disasters, the American people have
turned in an economic performance that is the envy of the world.

The American economy is preeminent, but we cannot afford to be complacent. In a
dynamic world economy, we are seeing new competitors like China and India. This
creates uncertainty, which makes it easier to feed people's fears. And so we are
seeing some old temptations return. Protectionists want to escape competition,
pretending that we can keep our high standard of living while walling off our
economy. Others say that the government needs to take a larger role in directing
the economy, centralizing more power in Washington and increasing taxes. We hear
claims that immigrants are somehow bad for the economy, even though this economy
could not function without them. All these are forms of economic retreat, and
they lead in the same direction, toward a stagnant and second-rate economy.

Tonight I will set out a better path, an agenda for a Nation that competes with
confidence, an agenda that will raise standards of living and generate new jobs.
Americans should not fear our economic future, because we intend to shape it.

Keeping America competitive begins with keeping our economy growing, and our
economy grows when Americans have more of their own money to spend, save, and
invest. In the last 5 years, the tax relief you passed has left $880 billion in
the hands of American workers, investors, small businesses, and families; and
they have used it to help produce more than 4 years of uninterrupted economic
growth. Yet the tax relief is set to expire in the next few years. If we do
nothing, American families will face a massive tax increase they do not expect
and will not welcome.

Because America needs more than a temporary expansion, we need more than
temporary tax relief. I urge the Congress to act responsibly and make the tax
cuts permanent.

Keeping America competitive requires us to be good stewards of tax dollars.
Every year of my Presidency, we have reduced the growth of nonsecurity
discretionary spending, and last year you passed bills that cut this spending.
This year my budget will cut it again and reduce or eliminate more than 140
programs that are performing poorly or not fulfilling essential priorities. By
passing these reforms, we will save the American taxpayer another $14 billion
next year and stay on track to cut the deficit in half by 2009. I am pleased
that Members of Congress are working on earmark reform, because the Federal
budget has too many special interest projects. And we can tackle this problem
together, if you pass the line-item veto.

We must also confront the larger challenge of mandatory spending, or
entitlements. This year, the first of about 78 million baby boomers turn 60,
including two of my dad's favorite people, me and President Clinton. This
milestone is more than a personal crisis; it is a national challenge. The
retirement of the baby boom generation will put unprecedented strains on the
Federal Government. By 2030, spending for Social Security, Medicare, and
Medicaid alone will be almost 60 percent of the entire Federal budget. And that
will present future Congresses with impossible choices, staggering tax
increases, immense deficits, or deep cuts in every category of spending.

Congress did not act last year on my proposal to save Social Security; yet the
rising cost of entitlements is a problem that is not going away. And with every
year we fail to act, the situation gets worse. So tonight, I ask you to join me
in creating a commission to examine the full impact of baby boom retirements on
Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. This commission should include Members
of Congress of both parties, and offer bipartisan solutions. We need to put
aside partisan politics, work together, and get this problem solved.

Keeping America competitive requires us to open more markets for all that
Americans make and grow. One out of every five factory jobs in America is
related to global trade, and we want people everywhere to buy American. With
open markets and a level playing field, no one can outproduce or outcompete the
American worker.

Keeping America competitive requires an immigration system that upholds our
laws, reflects our values, and serves the interests of our economy. Our Nation
needs orderly and secure borders. To meet this goal, we must have stronger
immigration enforcement and border protection. And we must have a rational,
humane guest worker program that rejects amnesty, allows temporary jobs for
people who seek them legally, and reduces smuggling and crime at the border.

Keeping America competitive requires affordable health care. Our government has
a responsibility to help provide health care for the poor and the elderly, and
we are meeting that responsibility. For all Americans, we must confront the
rising cost of care, strengthen the doctor-patient relationship, and help people
afford the insurance coverage they need. We will make wider use of electronic
records and other health information technology to help control costs and reduce
dangerous medical errors. We will strengthen health savings accounts by making
sure individuals and small business employees can buy insurance with the same
advantages that people working for big businesses now get. We will do more to
make this coverage portable, so workers can switch jobs without having to worry
about losing their health insurance. And because lawsuits are driving many good
doctors out of practice, leaving women in nearly 1,500 American counties without
a single OB-GYN, I ask the Congress to pass medical liability reform this year.

Keeping America competitive requires affordable energy. Here we have a serious
problem: America is addicted to oil, which is often imported from unstable parts
of the world.

The best way to break this addiction is through technology. Since 2001, we have
spent nearly $10 billion to develop cleaner, cheaper, and more reliable
alternative energy sources; and we are on the threshold of incredible advances.
So tonight, I announce the Advanced Energy Initiative, a 22 percent increase in
clean energy research at the Department of Energy, to push for breakthroughs in
two vital areas. To change how we power our homes and offices, we will invest
more in zero- emission coal-fired plants; revolutionary solar and wind
technologies; and clean, safe nuclear energy.

We must also change how we power our automobiles. We will increase our research
in better batteries for hybrid and electric cars and in pollution-free cars that
run on hydrogen. We will also fund additional research in cutting-edge methods
of producing ethanol, not just from corn but from wood chips, stalks, or switch
grass. Our goal is to make this new kind of ethanol practical and competitive
within 6 years. Breakthroughs on this and other new technologies will help us
reach another great goal: to replace more than 75 percent of our oil imports
from the Middle East by 2025. By applying the talent and technology of America,
this country can dramatically improve our environment, move beyond a
petroleum-based economy, and make our dependence on Middle Eastern oil a thing
of the past.

And to keep America competitive, one commitment is necessary above all: we must
continue to lead the world in human talent and creativity. Our greatest
advantage in the world has always been our educated, hardworking, ambitious
people; and we are going to keep that edge. Tonight I announce the American
Competitiveness Initiative, to encourage innovation throughout our economy and
to give our Nation's children a firm grounding in math and science.

First: I propose to double the Federal commitment to the most critical basic
research programs in the physical sciences over the next 10 years. This funding
will support the work of America's most creative minds as they explore promising
areas such as nanotechnology, supercomputing, and alternative energy sources.

Second: I propose to make permanent the research and development tax credit, to
encourage bolder private-sector investment in technology. With more research in
both the public and private sectors, we will improve our quality of life and
ensure that America will lead the world in opportunity and innovation for
decades to come.

Third: We need to encourage children to take more math and science and make sure
those courses are rigorous enough to compete with other nations. We have made a
good start in the early grades with the No Child Left Behind Act, which is
raising standards and lifting test scores across our country. Tonight, I propose
to train 70,000 high school teachers to lead advanced placement courses in math
and science; bring 30,000 math and science professionals to teach in classrooms;
and give early help to students who struggle with math, so they have a better
chance at good high-wage jobs. If we ensure that America's children succeed in
life, they will ensure that America succeeds in the world.

Preparing our Nation to compete in the world is a goal that all of us can share.
I urge you to support the American Competitiveness Initiative, and together we
will show the world what the American people can achieve.

America is a great force for freedom and prosperity. Yet our greatness is not
measured in power or luxuries, but by who we are and how we treat one another.
So we strive to be a compassionate, decent, hopeful society.

In recent years, America has become a more hopeful Nation. Violent crime rates
have fallen to their lowest levels since the 1970s. Welfare cases have dropped
by more than half over the past decade. Drug use among youth is down 19 percent
since 2001. There are fewer abortions in America than at any point in the last
three decades, and the number of children born to teenage mothers has been
falling for a dozen years in a row.

These gains are evidence of a quiet transformation, a revolution of conscience,
in which a rising generation is finding that a life of personal responsibility
is a life of fulfillment. Government has played a role. Wise policies such as
welfare reform, drug education, and support for abstinence and adoption have
made a difference in the character of our country. And everyone here tonight,
Democrat and Republican, has a right to be proud of this record.

Yet many Americans, especially parents, still have deep concerns about the
direction of our culture and the health of our most basic institutions. They are
concerned about unethical conduct by public officials, and discouraged by
activist courts that try to redefine marriage. And they worry about children in
our society who need direction and love, and about fellow citizens still
displaced by natural disaster, and about suffering caused by treatable diseases.

As we look at these challenges, we must never give in to the belief that America
is in decline or that our culture is doomed to unravel. The American people know
better than that. We have proven the pessimists wrong before, and we will do it
again.

A hopeful society depends on courts that deliver equal justice under the law.
The Supreme Court now has two superb new members on its bench, Chief Justice
John Roberts and Justice Sam Alito. I thank the Senate for confirming both of
them. I will continue to nominate men and women who understand that judges must
be servants of the law, and not legislate from the bench. Today marks the
official retirement of a very special American. For 24 years of faithful service
to our Nation, the United States is grateful to Justice Sandra Day O'Connor.

A hopeful society has institutions of science and medicine that do not cut
ethical corners and that recognize the matchless value of every life. Tonight, I
ask you to pass legislation to prohibit the most egregious abuses of medical
research: human cloning in all its forms, creating or implanting embryos for
experiments, creating human-animal hybrids, and buying, selling or patenting
human embryos. Human life is a gift from our Creator, and that gift should never
be discarded, devalued, or put up for sale.

A hopeful society expects elected officials to uphold the public trust.
Honorable people in both parties are working on reforms to strengthen the
ethical standards of Washington, and I support your efforts. Each of us has made
a pledge to be worthy of public responsibility, and that is a pledge we must
never forget, never dismiss, and never betray.

As we renew the promise of our institutions, let us also show the character of
America in our compassion and care for one another.

A hopeful society gives special attention to children who lack direction and
love. Through the Helping America's Youth Initiative, we are encouraging caring
adults to get involved in the life of a child, and this good work is being led
by our First Lady, Laura Bush. This year we will add resources to encourage
young people to stay in school, so more of America's youth can raise their
sights and achieve their dreams.

A hopeful society comes to the aid of fellow citizens in times of suffering and
emergency and stays at it until they are back on their feet. So far the Federal
Government has committed $85 billion to the people of the gulf coast and New
Orleans. We are removing debris, repairing highways, and building stronger
levees. We are providing business loans and housing assistance. Yet as we meet
these immediate needs, we must also address deeper challenges that existed
before the storm arrived. In New Orleans and in other places, many of our fellow
citizens have felt excluded from the promise of our country. The answer is not
only temporary relief, but schools that teach every child and job skills that
bring upward mobility and more opportunities to own a home and start a business.
As we recover from a disaster, let us also work for the day when all Americans
are protected by justice, equal in hope, and rich in opportunity.

A hopeful society acts boldly to fight diseases like HIV/AIDS, which can be
prevented and treated and defeated. More than a million Americans live with HIV,
and half of all AIDS cases occur among African Americans. I ask Congress to
reform and reauthorize the Ryan White Act and provide new funding to States so
we end the waiting lists for AIDS medicines in America. We will also lead a
nationwide effort, working closely with African American churches and
faith-based groups, to deliver rapid HIV tests to millions, end the stigma of
AIDS, and come closer to the day when there are no new infections in America.

Fellow citizens, we have been called to leadership in a period of consequence.
We have entered a great ideological conflict we did nothing to invite. We see
great changes in science and commerce that will influence all our lives. And
sometimes it can seem that history is turning in a wide arc, toward an unknown
shore.

Yet the destination of history is determined by human action, and every great
movement of history comes to a point of choosing. Lincoln could have accepted
peace at the cost of disunity and continued slavery. Martin Luther King could
have stopped at Birmingham or at Selma and achieved only half a victory over
segregation. The United States could have accepted the permanent division of
Europe and been complicit in the oppression of others. Today, having come far in
our own historical journey, we must decide: Will we turn back, or finish well?

Before history is written down in books, it is written in courage. Like
Americans before us, we will show that courage, and we will finish well. We will
lead freedom's advance. We will compete and excel in the global economy. We will
renew the defining moral commitments of this land. And so we move forward,
optimistic about our country, faithful to its cause, and confident of the
victories to come.

May God bless America.

Madam Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, distinguished
guests, and fellow citizens:


This rite of custom brings us together at a defining hour when
decisions are hard and courage is tested. We enter the year 2007 with
large endeavors under way and others that are ours to begin. In all of
this, much is asked of us. We must have the will to face difficult
challenges and determined enemies and the wisdom to face them
together.


Some in this chamber are new to the House and Senate and I
congratulate the Democratic majority. Congress has changed, but our
responsibilities have not. Each of us is guided by our own
convictions and to these we must stay faithful. Yet we are all held
to the same standards, and called to serve the same good purposes: To
extend this nation's prosperity ... to spend the people's money wisely
... to solve problems, not leave them to future generations ... to
guard America against all evil, and to keep faith with those we have
sent forth to defend us.


We are not the first to come here with government divided and
uncertainty in the air. Like many before us, we can work through our
differences and achieve big things for the American people. Our
citizens don't much care which side of the aisle we sit on as long as
we are willing to cross that aisle when there is work to be done. Our
job is to make life better for our fellow Americans and help them to
build a future of hope and opportunity and this is the business
before us tonight.


A future of hope and opportunity begins with a growing economy, and
that is what we have. We are now in the 41st month of uninterrupted
job growth in a recovery that has created 7.2 million new jobs ... so
far. Unemployment is low, inflation is low and wages are rising. This
economy is on the move and our job is to keep it that way, not with
more government but with more enterprise.


Next week, I will deliver a full report on the state of our
economy. Tonight, I want to discuss three economic reforms that
deserve to be priorities for this Congress.


First, we must balance the federal budget. We can do so without
raising taxes. What we need to do is impose spending discipline in
Washington, D.C. We set a goal of cutting the deficit in half by 2009
and met that goal three years ahead of schedule. Now let us take the
next step. In the coming weeks, I will submit a budget that eliminates
the federal deficit within the next five years. I ask you to make the
same commitment. Together, we can restrain the spending appetite of
the federal government, and balance the federal budget.


Next, there is the matter of earmarks. These special interest items
are often slipped into bills at the last hour when not even C-SPAN is
watching. In 2005 alone, the number of earmarks grew to over 13,000
and totaled nearly $18 billion. Even worse, over 90 percent of
earmarks never make it to the floor of the House and Senate; they are
dropped into committee reports that are not even part of the bill that
arrives on my desk. You did not vote them into law. I did not sign
them into law. Yet they are treated as if they have the force of
law. The time has come to end this practice. So let us work together
to reform the budget process ... expose every earmark to the light of
day and to a vote in Congress and cut the number and cost of earmarks
at least in half by the end of this session.


Finally, to keep this economy strong we must take on the challenge of
entitlements. Social Security and Medicare and Medicaid are
commitments of conscience and so it is our duty to keep them
permanently sound. Yet we are failing in that duty and this failure
will one day leave our children with three bad options: huge tax
increases, huge deficits, or huge and immediate cuts in
benefits. Everyone in this chamber knows this to be true, yet somehow
we have not found it in ourselves to act. So let us work together and
do it now. With enough good sense and good will, you and I can fix
Medicare and Medicaid and save Social Security.


Spreading opportunity and hope in America also requires public schools
that give children the knowledge and character they need in life. Five
years ago, we rose above partisan differences to pass the No Child
Left Behind Act preserving local control, raising standards in public
schools, and holding those schools accountable for results. And
because we acted, students are performing better in reading and math,
and minority students are closing the achievement gap.


Now the task is to build on this success, without watering down
standards ... without taking control from local communities ... and
without backsliding and calling it reform. We can lift student
achievement even higher by giving local leaders flexibility to turn
around failing schools ... and by giving families with children stuck
in failing schools the right to choose something better. We must
increase funds for students who struggle and make sure these children
get the special help they need. And we can make sure our children are
prepared for the jobs of the future, and our country is more
competitive, by strengthening math and science skills. The No Child
Left Behind Act has worked for America's children, and I ask Congress
to reauthorize this good law.


A future of hope and opportunity requires that all our citizens have
affordable and available health care. When it comes to health care,
government has an obligation to care for the elderly, the disabled and
poor children. We will meet those responsibilities. For all other
Americans, private health insurance is the best way to meet their
needs. But many Americans cannot afford a health insurance policy.


Tonight, I propose two new initiatives to help more Americans afford
their own insurance. First, I propose a standard tax deduction for
health insurance that will be like the standard tax deduction for
dependents. Families with health insurance will pay no income or
payroll taxes on $15,000 of their income. Single Americans with health
insurance will pay no income or payroll taxes on $7,500 of their
income. With this reform, more than 100 million men, women, and
children who are now covered by employer-provided insurance will
benefit from lower tax bills.


At the same time, this reform will level the playing field for those
who do not get health insurance through their job. For Americans who
now purchase health insurance on their own, my proposal would mean a
substantial tax savings $4,500 for a family of four making $60,000 a
year. And for the millions of other Americans who have no health
insurance at all, this deduction would help put a basic private health
insurance plan within their reach. Changing the tax code is a vital
and necessary step to making healthcare affordable for more Americans.


My second proposal is to help the states that are coming up with
innovative ways to cover the uninsured. States that make basic private
health insurance available to all their citizens should receive
federal funds to help them provide this coverage to the poor and the
sick. I have asked the Secretary of Health and Human Services to work
with Congress to take existing federal funds and use them to create
"Affordable Choices" grants. These grants would give our nation's
governors more money and more flexibility to get private health
insurance to those most in need.


There are many other ways that Congress can help. We need to expand
Health Savings Accounts ... help small businesses through Association
Health Plans ... reduce costs and medical errors with better
information technology ... encourage price transparency ... and
protect good doctors from junk lawsuits by passing medical liability
reform. And in all we do, we must remember that the best health care
decisions are made not by government and insurance companies, but by
patients and their doctors.


Extending hope and opportunity in our country requires an immigration
system worthy of America  with laws that are fair and borders that
are secure. When laws and borders are routinely violated, this harms
the interests of our country. To secure our border, we are doubling
the size of the Border Patrol and funding new infrastructure and
technology.


Yet even with all these steps, we cannot fully secure the border
unless we take pressure off the border, and that requires a temporary
worker program. We should establish a legal and orderly path for
foreign workers to enter our country to work on a temporary basis. As
a result, they won't have to try to sneak in, and that will leave
border agents free to chase down drug smugglers, and criminals and
terrorists. We will enforce our immigration laws at the worksite and
give employers the tools to verify the legal status of their workers,
so there is no excuse left for violating the law. We need to uphold
the great tradition of the melting pot that welcomes and assimilates
new arrivals. And we need to resolve the status of the illegal
immigrants who are already in our country without animosity and
without amnesty.


Convictions run deep in this Capitol when it comes to immigration. Let
us have a serious, civil, and conclusive debate so that you can pass,
and I can sign, comprehensive immigration reform into law.


Extending hope and opportunity depends on a stable supply of energy
that keeps America's economy running and America's environment
clean. For too long, our nation has been dependent on foreign oil. And
this dependence leaves us more vulnerable to hostile regimes, and to
terrorists who could cause huge disruptions of oil shipments ... raise
the price of oil ... and do great harm to our economy.


It is in our vital interest to diversify America's energy supply, and
the way forward is through technology. We must continue changing the
way America generates electric power by even greater use of clean coal
technology ... solar and wind energy ... and clean, safe nuclear
power. We need to press on with battery research for plug-in and
hybrid vehicles, and expand the use of clean diesel vehicles and
biodiesel fuel. We must continue investing in new methods of producing
ethanol, using everything from wood chips, to grasses to agricultural
wastes.


We have made a lot of progress, thanks to good policies in Washington
and the strong response of the market. Now even more dramatic advances
are within reach. Tonight, I ask Congress to join me in pursuing a
great goal. Let us build on the work we have done and reduce gasoline
usage in the United States by 20 percent in the next 10 years, thereby
cutting our total imports by the equivalent of three-quarters of all
the oil we now import from the Middle East.


To reach this goal, we must increase the supply of alternative fuels
by setting a mandatory fuels standard to require 35 billion gallons of
renewable and alternative fuels in 2017 - this is nearly five times
the current target. At the same time, we need to reform and modernize
fuel economy standards for cars the way we did for light trucks and
conserve up to 8 1/2 billion more gallons of gasoline by 2017.


Achieving these ambitious goals will dramatically reduce our
dependence on foreign oil, but will not eliminate it. So as we
continue to diversify our fuel supply, we must also step up domestic
oil production in environmentally sensitive ways. And to further
protect America against severe disruptions to our oil supply, I ask
Congress to double the current capacity of the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve.


America is on the verge of technological breakthroughs that will
enable us to live our lives less dependent on oil. These technologies
will help us become better stewards of the environment and they will
help us to confront the serious challenge of global climate change.


A future of hope and opportunity requires a fair, impartial system of
justice. The lives of citizens across our nation are affected by the
outcome of cases pending in our federal courts. And we have a shared
obligation to ensure that the federal courts have enough judges to
hear those cases and deliver timely rulings. As President, I have a
duty to nominate qualified men and women to vacancies on the federal
bench. And the United States Senate has a duty as well: to give those
nominees a fair hearing and a prompt up-or-down vote on the Senate
floor.


For all of us in this room, there is no higher responsibility than to
protect the people of this country from danger. Five years have come
and gone since we saw the scenes and felt the sorrow that terrorists
can cause. We have had time to take stock of our situation. We have
added many critical protections to guard the homeland. We know with
certainty that the horrors of that September morning were just a
glimpse of what the terrorists intend for us unless we stop them.


With the distance of time, we find ourselves debating the causes of
conflict and the course we have followed. Such debates are essential
when a great democracy faces great questions. Yet one question has
surely been settled - that to win the war on terror we must take the
fight to the enemy.


From the start, America and our allies have protected our people by
staying on the offense. The enemy knows that the days of comfortable
sanctuary, easy movement, steady financing and free-flowing
communications are long over. For the terrorists, life since 9/11 has
never been the same.


Our success in this war is often measured by the things that did not
happen. We cannot know the full extent of the attacks that we and our
allies have prevented, but here is some of what we do know: We stopped
an al Qaeda plot to fly a hijacked airplane into the tallest building
on the West Coast. We broke up a Southeast Asian terrorist cell
grooming operatives for attacks inside the United States. We uncovered
an al Qaeda cell developing anthrax to be used in attacks against
America. And just last August, British authorities uncovered a plot to
blow up passenger planes bound for America over the Atlantic
Ocean. For each life saved, we owe a debt of gratitude to the brave
public servants who devote their lives to finding the terrorists and
stopping them.


Every success against the terrorists is a reminder of the shoreless
ambitions of this enemy. The evil that inspired and rejoiced in 9/11
is still at work in the world. And so long as that is the case,
America is still a nation at war.


In the minds of the terrorists, this war began well before September
11th and will not end until their radical vision is fulfilled. And
these past five years have given us a much clearer view of the nature
of this enemy. Al Qaeda and its followers are Sunni extremists,
possessed by hatred and commanded by a harsh and narrow ideology. Take
almost any principle of civilization and their goal is the
opposite. They preach with threats ... instruct with bullets and bombs
... and promise paradise for the murder of the innocent.


Our enemies are quite explicit about their intentions. They want to
overthrow moderate governments and establish safe havens from which to
plan and carry out new attacks on our country. By killing and
terrorizing Americans, they want to force our country to retreat from
the world and abandon the cause of liberty. They would then be free to
impose their will and spread their totalitarian ideology. Listen to
this warning from the late terrorist Zarqawi: "We will sacrifice our
blood and bodies to put an end to your dreams, and what is coming is
even worse." And Osama bin Laden declared: "Death is better than
living on this Earth with the unbelievers among us."


These men are not given to idle words, and they are just one camp in
the Islamist radical movement. In recent times, it has also become
clear that we face an escalating danger from Shia extremists who are
just as hostile to America and are also determined to dominate the
Middle East. Many are known to take direction from the regime in Iran,
which is funding and arming terrorists like Hezbollah - a group second
only to al Qaeda in the American lives it has taken.


The Shia and Sunni extremists are different faces of the same
totalitarian threat. But whatever slogans they chant, when they
slaughter the innocent, they have the same wicked purposes. They want
to kill Americans ... kill democracy in the Middle East ... and gain
the weapons to kill on an even more horrific scale.


In the sixth year since our nation was attacked, I wish I could report
to you that the dangers have ended. They have not. And so it remains
the policy of this government to use every lawful and proper tool of
intelligence, diplomacy, law enforcement, and military action to do
our duty, to find these enemies, and to protect the American people.


This war is more than a clash of arms. It is a decisive ideological
struggle, and the security of our nation is in the balance. To
prevail, we must remove the conditions that inspire blind hatred and
drove 19 men to get onto airplanes and come to kill us. What every
terrorist fears most is human freedom - societies where men and
women make their own choices, answer to their own conscience and live
by their hopes instead of their resentments. Free people are not drawn
to violent and malignant ideologies, and most will choose a better way
when they are given a chance. So we advance our own security interests
by helping moderates, reformers and brave voices for democracy. The
great question of our day is whether America will help men and women
in the Middle East to build free societies and share in the rights of
all humanity. And I say, for the sake of our own security . . . we
must.


In the last two years, we have seen the desire for liberty in the
broader Middle East, and we have been sobered by the enemy's fierce
reaction. In 2005, the world watched as the citizens of Lebanon raised
the banner of the Cedar Revolution, drove out the Syrian occupiers and
chose new leaders in free elections. In 2005, the people of
Afghanistan defied the terrorists and elected a democratic
legislature. And in 2005, the Iraqi people held three national
elections - choosing a transitional government, adopting the most
progressive, democratic constitution in the Arab world and then
electing a government under that constitution. Despite endless threats
from the killers in their midst, nearly 12 million Iraqi citizens came
out to vote in a show of hope and solidarity we should never forget.


A thinking enemy watched all of these scenes, adjusted their tactics,
and in 2006 they struck back. In Lebanon, assassins took the life of
Pierre Gemayel, a prominent participant in the Cedar Revolution. And
Hezbollah terrorists, with support from Syria and Iran, sowed conflict
in the region and are seeking to undermine Lebanon's legitimately
elected government. In Afghanistan, Taliban and al Qaeda fighters
tried to regain power by regrouping and engaging Afghan and NATO
forces. In Iraq, al Qaeda and other Sunni extremists blew up one of
the most sacred places in Shia Islam the Golden Mosque of
Samarra. This atrocity, directed at a Muslim house of prayer, was
designed to provoke retaliation from Iraqi Shia and it
succeeded. Radical Shia elements, some of whom receive support from
Iran, formed death squads. The result was a tragic escalation of
sectarian rage and reprisal that continues to this day.


This is not the fight we entered in Iraq, but it is the fight we are
in. Every one of us wishes that this war were over and won. Yet it
would not be like us to leave our promises unkept, our friends
abandoned and our own security at risk. Ladies and gentlemen: On this
day, at this hour, it is still within our power to shape the outcome
of this battle. So let us find our resolve, and turn events toward
victory.


We are carrying out a new strategy in Iraq, a plan that demands more
from Iraq's elected government, and gives our forces in Iraq the
reinforcements they need to complete their mission. Our goal is a
democratic Iraq that upholds the rule of law, respects the rights of
its people, provides them security and is an ally in the war on
terror.


In order to make progress toward this goal, the Iraqi government must
stop the sectarian violence in its capital. But the Iraqis are not yet
ready to do this on their own. So we are deploying reinforcements of
more than 20,000 additional soldiers and Marines to Iraq. The vast
majority will go to Baghdad, where they will help Iraqi forces to
clear and secure neighborhoods, and serve as advisers embedded in
Iraqi Army units. With Iraqis in the lead, our forces will help secure
the city by chasing down terrorists, insurgents, and roaming death
squads. And in Anbar Province, where al Qaeda terrorists have gathered
and local forces have begun showing a willingness to fight them, we
are sending an additional 4,000 United States Marines, with orders to
find the terrorists and clear them out. We did not drive al Qaeda out
of their safe haven in Afghanistan only to let them set up a new safe
haven in a free Iraq.


The people of Iraq want to live in peace, and now is the time for
their government to act. Iraq's leaders know that our commitment is
not open-ended. They have promised to deploy more of their own troops
to secure Baghdad, and they must do so. They have pledged that they
will confront violent radicals of any faction or political party. They
need to follow through, and lift needless restrictions on Iraqi and
Coalition forces, so these troops can achieve their mission of
bringing security to all of the people of Baghdad. Iraq's leaders have
committed themselves to a series of benchmarks to achieve
reconciliation - to share oil revenues among all of Iraq's citizens
... to put the wealth of Iraq into the rebuilding of Iraq ... to allow
more Iraqis to re-enter their nation's civic life ... to hold local
elections ... and to take responsibility for security in every Iraqi
province. But for all of this to happen, Baghdad must be secured. And
our plan will help the Iraqi government take back its capital and make
good on its commitments.


My fellow citizens, our military commanders and I have carefully
weighed the options. We discussed every possible approach. In the end,
I chose this course of action because it provides the best chance of
success. Many in this chamber understand that America must not fail in
Iraq because you understand that the consequences of failure would be
grievous and far reaching.


If American forces step back before Baghdad is secure, the Iraqi
government would be overrun by extremists on all sides. We could
expect an epic battle between Shia extremists backed by Iran and Sunni
extremists aided by al Qaeda and supporters of the old regime. A
contagion of violence could spill out across the country, and, in
time, the entire region could be drawn into the conflict.


For America, this is a nightmare scenario. For the enemy, this is the
objective. Chaos is their greatest ally in this struggle. And out of
chaos in Iraq, would emerge an emboldened enemy with new safe havens,
new recruits, new resources and an even greater determination to harm
America. To allow this to happen would be to ignore the lessons of
September 11th and invite tragedy. And ladies and gentlemen, nothing
is more important at this moment in our history than for America to
succeed in the Middle East ... to succeed in Iraq ... and to spare the
American people from this danger.


This is where matters stand tonight, in the here and now. I have
spoken with many of you in person. I respect you and the arguments you
have made. We went into this largely united -  in our assumptions,
and in our convictions. And whatever you voted for, you did not vote
for failure. Our country is pursuing a new strategy in Iraq, and I ask
you to give it a chance to work. And I ask you to support our troops
in the field and those on their way.


The war on terror we fight today is a generational struggle that will
continue long after you and I have turned our duties over to
others. That is why it is important to work together so our nation can
see this great effort through. Both parties and both branches should
work in close consultation. And this is why I propose to establish a
special advisory council on the war on terror, made up of leaders in
Congress from both political parties. We will share ideas for how to
position America to meet every challenge that confronts us. And we
will show our enemies abroad that we are united in the goal of
victory.


One of the first steps we can take together is to add to the ranks of
our military so that the American Armed Forces are ready for all the
challenges ahead. Tonight I ask the Congress to authorize an increase
in the size of our active Army and Marine Corps by 92,000 in the next
five years. A second task we can take on together is to design and
establish a volunteer Civilian Reserve Corps. Such a corps would
function much like our military reserve. It would ease the burden on
the Armed Forces by allowing us to hire civilians with critical skills
to serve on missions abroad when America needs them. And it would give
people across America who do not wear the uniform a chance to serve in
the defining struggle of our time.


Americans can have confidence in the outcome of this struggle because
we are not in this struggle alone. We have a diplomatic strategy that
is rallying the world to join in the fight against extremism. In Iraq,
multinational forces are operating under a mandate from the United
Nations, and we are working with Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and the
Gulf States to increase support for Iraq's government. The United
Nations has imposed sanctions on Iran and made it clear that the world
will not allow the regime in Tehran to acquire nuclear weapons. With
the other members of the Quartet - the U.N., the European Union, and
Russia - we are pursuing diplomacy to help bring peace to the Holy
Land and pursuing the establishment of a democratic Palestinian state
living side-by-side with Israel in peace and security. In Afghanistan,
NATO has taken the lead in turning back the Taliban and al Qaeda
offensive - the first time the Alliance has deployed forces outside
the North Atlantic area. Together with our partners in China, Japan,
Russia, and South Korea, we are pursuing intensive diplomacy to
achieve a Korean Peninsula free of nuclear weapons. And we will
continue to speak out for the cause of freedom in places like Cuba,
Belarus, and Burma, and continue to awaken the conscience of the world
to save the people of Darfur.


American foreign policy is more than a matter of war and
diplomacy. Our work in the world is also based on a timeless truth: To
whom much is given, much is required. We hear the call to take on the
challenges of hunger, poverty, and disease, and that is precisely what
America is doing. We must continue to fight HIV/AIDS, especially on
the continent of Africa, and because you funded our Emergency Plan for
AIDS Relief, the number of people receiving life-saving drugs has
grown from 50,000 to more than 800,000 in three short years. I ask you
to continue funding our efforts to fight HIV/AIDS. I ask you to
provide $1.2 billion over five years so we can combat malaria in 15
African countries. I ask that you fund the Millennium Challenge
Account, so that American aid reaches the people who need it in
nations where democracy is on the rise and corruption is in
retreat. And let us continue to support the expanded trade and debt
relief that are the best hope for lifting lives and eliminating
poverty.


When America serves others in this way, we show the strength and
generosity of our country. These deeds reflect the character of our
people. The greatest strength we have is the heroic kindness, courage,
and self sacrifice of the American people. You see this spirit often
if you know where to look, and tonight we need only look above to the
gallery.


Dikembe Mutombo grew up in Africa, amid great poverty and disease. He
came to Georgetown University on a scholarship to study medicine, but
coach John Thompson got a look at Dikembe and had a different
idea. Dikembe became a star in the NBA, and a citizen of the United
States. But he never forgot the land of his birth, or the duty to
share his blessings with others. He has built a brand new hospital in
his hometown. A friend has said of this good-hearted man: "Mutombo
believes that God has given him this opportunity to do great things."
And we are proud to call this son of the Congo our fellow American.


After her daughter was born, Julie Aigner-Clark searched for ways to
share her love of music and art with her child. So she borrowed some
equipment and began filming children's videos in her basement. The
Baby Einstein Company was born, and in just five years her business
grew to more than $20 million in sales. In November 2001, Julie sold
Baby Einstein to the Walt Disney company - and with her help, Baby
Einstein has grown into a $200 million business. Julie represents the
great enterprising spirit of America. And she is using her success to
help others - producing child safety videos with John Walsh of the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Julie says of her
new project: "I believe it's the most important thing that I've ever
done. I believe that children have the right to live in a world that
is safe." We are pleased to welcome this talented business
entrepreneur and generous social entrepreneur - Julie Aigner-Clark.


Three weeks ago, Wesley Autrey was waiting at a Harlem subway station
with his two little girls when he saw a man fall into the path of a
train. With seconds to act, Wesley jumped onto the tracks ... pulled
the man into a space between the rails ... and held him as the train
passed right above their heads. He insists he's not a hero. Wesley
says: "We got guys and girls overseas dying for us to have our
freedoms. We got to show each other some love." There is something
wonderful about a country that produces a brave and humble man like
Wesley Autrey.


Tommy Rieman was a teenager pumping gas in Independence, Ky., when he
enlisted in the United States Army. In December 2003, he was on a
reconnaissance mission in Iraq when his team came under heavy enemy
fire. From his Humvee, Sgt. Rieman returned fire and used his body as
a shield to protect his gunner. He was shot in the chest and arm and
received shrapnel wounds to his legs yet he refused medical attention,
and stayed in the fight. He helped to repel a second attack, firing
grenades at the enemy's position. For his exceptional courage,
Sgt. Rieman was awarded the Silver Star. And like so many other
Americans who have volunteered to defend us, he has earned the respect
and gratitude of our whole country.


In such courage and compassion, ladies and gentlemen, we see the
spirit and character of America and these qualities are not in short
supply. This is a decent and honorable country and resilient, too. We
have been through a lot together. We have met challenges and faced
dangers, and we know that more lie ahead. Yet we can go forward with
confidence, because the State of our Union is strong, our cause in the
world is right and tonight that cause goes on.

Madam Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress,
distinguished guests, and fellow citizens:


Seven years have passed since I first stood before you at this
rostrum. In that time, our country has been tested in ways none of us
could have imagined. We have faced hard decisions about peace and war,
rising competition in the world economy, and the health and welfare of
our citizens. These issues call for vigorous debate, and I think it's
fair to say we've answered that call. Yet history will record that
amid our differences, we acted with purpose. And together, we showed
the world the power and resilience of American self-government.


All of us were sent to Washington to carry out the people's
business. That is the purpose of this body. It is the meaning of our
oath. And it remains our charge to keep.


The actions of the 110th Congress will affect the security and
prosperity of our nation long after this session has ended. In this
election year, let us show our fellow Americans that we recognize our
responsibilities and are determined to meet them. And let us show them
that Republicans and Democrats can compete for votes and cooperate for
results at the same time.


From expanding opportunity to protecting our country, we have made
good progress. Yet we have unfinished business before us, and the
American people expect us to get it done.


In the work ahead, we must be guided by the philosophy that made our
nation great. As Americans, we believe in the power of individuals to
determine their destiny and shape the course of history. We believe
that the most reliable guide for our country is the collective wisdom
of ordinary citizens. So in all we do, we must trust in the ability of
free people to make wise decisions, and empower them to improve their
lives and their futures.


To build a prosperous future, we must trust people with their own
money and empower them to grow our economy. As we meet tonight, our
economy is undergoing a period of uncertainty. America has added jobs
for a record 52 straight months, but jobs are now growing at a slower
pace. Wages are up, but so are prices for food and gas. Exports are
rising, but the housing market has declined. And at kitchen tables
across our country, there is concern about our economic future.


In the long run, Americans can be confident about our economic
growth. But in the short run, we can all see that growth is
slowing. So last week, my administration reached agreement with
Speaker Pelosi and Republican Leader Boehner on a robust growth
package that includes tax relief for individuals and families and
incentives for business investment. The temptation will be to load up
the bill. That would delay it or derail it, and neither option is
acceptable. This is a good agreement that will keep our economy
growing and our people working. And this Congress must pass it as soon
as possible.


We have other work to do on taxes. Unless the Congress acts, most of
the tax relief we have delivered over the past seven years will be
taken away. Some in Washington argue that letting tax relief expire is
not a tax increase. Try explaining that to 116 million American
taxpayers who would see their taxes rise by an average of
$1,800. Others have said they would personally be happy to pay higher
taxes. I welcome their enthusiasm, and I am pleased to report that the
I.R.S. accepts both checks and money orders.


Most Americans think their taxes are high enough. With all the other
pressures on their finances, American families should not have to
worry about the federal government taking a bigger bite out of their
paychecks. There is only one way to eliminate this uncertainty: make
the tax relief permanent. And members of Congress should know: If any
bill raising taxes reaches my desk, I will veto it.


Just as we trust Americans with their own money, we need to earn their
trust by spending their tax dollars wisely. Next week, I will send you
a budget that terminates or substantially reduces 151 wasteful or
bloated programs totaling more than $18 billion. And this budget will
keep America on track for a surplus in 2012. American families have to
balance their budgets, and so should their government.


The people's trust in their government is undermined by Congressional
earmarks special interest projects that are often snuck in at the last
minute, without discussion or debate. Last year, I asked you to
voluntarily cut the number and cost of earmarks in half. I also asked
you to stop slipping earmarks into committee reports that never even
come to a vote. Unfortunately, neither goal was met. So this time, if
you send me an appropriations bill that does not cut the number and
cost of earmarks in half, I will send it back to you with my veto. And
tomorrow, I will issue an Executive Order that directs federal
agencies to ignore any future earmark that is not voted on by the
Congress. If these items are truly worth funding, the Congress should
debate them in the open and hold a public vote.


Our shared responsibilities extend beyond matters of taxes and spending.


On housing, we must trust Americans with the responsibility of
homeownership and empower them to weather turbulent times in the
housing market. My administration brought together the HOPE NOW
alliance, which is helping many struggling homeowners avoid
foreclosure. The Congress can help even more. Tonight I ask you to
pass legislation to reform Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, modernize the
Federal Housing Administration, and allow state housing agencies to
issue tax-free bonds to help homeowners refinance their
mortgages. These are difficult times for many American families, and
by taking these steps, we can help more of them keep their homes.


To build a future of quality health care, we must trust patients and
doctors to make medical decisions and empower them with better
information and better options. We share a common goal: making health
care more affordable and accessible for all Americans. The best way to
achieve that goal is by expanding consumer choice, not government
control. So I have proposed ending the bias in the tax code against
those who do not get their health insurance through their
employer. This one reform would put private coverage within reach for
millions, and I call on the Congress to pass it this year. The
Congress must also expand health savings accounts, create Association
Health Plans for small businesses, promote health information
technology, and confront the epidemic of junk medical lawsuits. With
all these steps, we will help ensure that decisions about your medical
care are made in the privacy of your doctor's office, not in the
halls of Congress.


On education, we must trust students to learn if given the chance and
empower parents to demand results from our schools. In neighborhoods
across our country, there are boys and girls with dreams, and a
decent education is their only hope of achieving them. Six years ago,
we came together to pass the No Child Left Behind Act, and today no
one can deny its results. Last year, fourth and eighth graders
achieved the highest math scores on record. Reading scores are on the
rise. And African-American and Hispanic students posted all-time
highs. Now we must work together to increase accountability, add
flexibility for states and districts, reduce the number of high school
dropouts, and provide extra help for struggling schools. Members of
Congress: The No Child Left Behind Act is a bipartisan achievement. It
is succeeding. And we owe it to America's children, their parents,
and their teachers to strengthen this good law.


We must also do more to help children when their schools do not
measure up. Thanks to the D.C. Opportunity Scholarships you approved,
more than 2,600 of the poorest children in our nation's capital have
found new hope at a faith-based or other non-public school. Sadly,
these schools are disappearing at an alarming rate in many of
America's inner cities. So I will convene a White House summit aimed
at strengthening these lifelines of learning. And to open the doors of
these schools to more children, I ask you to support a new $300
million program called Pell Grants for Kids. We have seen how Pell
Grants help low-income college students realize their full
potential. Together, we have expanded the size and reach of these
grants. Now let's apply that same spirit to help liberate poor
children trapped in failing public schools.


On trade, we must trust American workers to compete with anyone in the
world and empower them by opening up new markets overseas. Today, our
economic growth increasingly depends on our ability to sell American
goods, crops, and services all over the world. So we are working to
break down barriers to trade and investment wherever we can. We are
working for a successful Doha round of trade talks, and we must
complete a good agreement this year. At the same time, we are pursuing
opportunities to open up new markets by passing free trade agreements.


I thank the Congress for approving a good agreement with Peru. Now I
ask you to approve agreements with Colombia, Panama, and South
Korea. Many products from these nations now enter America duty-free,
yet many of our products face steep tariffs in their markets. These
agreements will level the playing field. They will give us better
access to nearly 100 million customers. And they will support good
jobs for the finest workers in the world: those whose products say
"Made in the USA."


These agreements also promote America's strategic interests. The
first agreement that will come before you is with Colombia, a friend
of America that is confronting violence and terror and fighting drug
traffickers. If we fail to pass this agreement, we will embolden the
purveyors of false populism in our hemisphere. So we must come
together, pass this agreement, and show our neighbors in the region
that democracy leads to a better life.


Trade brings better jobs, better choices, and better prices. Yet for
some Americans, trade can mean losing a job, and the federal
government has a responsibility to help. I ask the Congress to
reauthorize and reform trade adjustment assistance, so we can help
these displaced workers learn new skills and find new jobs.


To build a future of energy security, we must trust in the creative
genius of American researchers and entrepreneurs and empower them to
pioneer a new generation of clean energy technology. Our security, our
prosperity, and our environment all require reducing our dependence on
oil. Last year, I asked you to pass legislation to reduce oil
consumption over the next decade, and you responded. Together we
should take the next steps: Let us fund new technologies that can
generate coal power while capturing carbon emissions. Let us increase
the use of renewable power and emissions-free nuclear power. Let us
continue investing in advanced battery technology and renewable fuels
to power the cars and trucks of the future. Let us create a new
international clean technology fund, which will help developing
nations like India and China make greater use of clean energy
sources. And let us complete an international agreement that has the
potential to slow, stop, and eventually reverse the growth of
greenhouse gases. This agreement will be effective only if it includes
commitments by every major economy and gives none a free ride. The
United States is committed to strengthening our energy security and
confronting global climate change. And the best way to meet these
goals is for America to continue leading the way toward the
development of cleaner and more efficient technology.


To keep America competitive into the future, we must trust in the
skill of our scientists and engineers and empower them to pursue the
breakthroughs of tomorrow. Last year, the Congress passed legislation
supporting the American Competitiveness Initiative, but never followed
through with the funding. This funding is essential to keeping our
scientific edge. So I ask the Congress to double federal support for
critical basic research in the physical sciences and ensure America
remains the most dynamic nation on earth.


On matters of science and life, we must trust in the innovative spirit
of medical researchers and empower them to discover new treatments
while respecting moral boundaries. In November, we witnessed a
landmark achievement when scientists discovered a way to reprogram
adult skin cells to act like embryonic stem cells. This breakthrough
has the potential to move us beyond the divisive debates of the past
by extending the frontiers of medicine without the destruction of
human life. So we are expanding funding for this type of ethical
medical research. And as we explore promising avenues of research, we
must also ensure that all life is treated with the dignity it
deserves. So I call on the Congress to pass legislation that bans
unethical practices such as the buying, selling, patenting, or cloning
of human life.


On matters of justice, we must trust in the wisdom of our Founders and
empower judges who understand that the Constitution means what it
says. I have submitted judicial nominees who will rule by the letter
of the law, not the whim of the gavel. Many of these nominees are
being unfairly delayed. They are worthy of confirmation, and the
Senate should give each of them a prompt up-or-down vote.


In communities across our land, we must trust in the good heart of the
American people and empower them to serve their neighbors in
need. Over the past seven years, more of our fellow citizens have
discovered that the pursuit of happiness leads to the path of
service. Americans have volunteered in record numbers. Charitable
donations are higher than ever. Faith-based groups are bringing hope
to pockets of despair, with newfound support from the federal
government. And to help guarantee equal treatment for faith-based
organizations when they compete for federal funds, I ask you to
permanently extend Charitable Choice.


Tonight the armies of compassion continue the march to a new day in
the Gulf Coast. America honors the strength and resilience of the
people of this region. We reaffirm our pledge to help them build
stronger and better than before. And tonight I am pleased to announce
that in April we will host this year's North American Summit of
Canada, Mexico, and the United States in the great city of New
Orleans.


There are two other pressing challenges that I have raised repeatedly
before this body, and that this body has failed to address:
entitlement spending and immigration.


Every Member in this chamber knows that spending on entitlement
programs like Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid is growing
faster than we can afford. And we all know the painful choices ahead
if America stays on this path: massive tax increases, sudden and
drastic cuts in benefits, or crippling deficits. I have laid out
proposals to reform these programs. Now I ask members of Congress to
offer your proposals and come up with a bipartisan solution to save
these vital programs for our children and grandchildren.


The other pressing challenge is immigration. America needs to secure
our borders - and with your help, my administration is taking steps
to do so. We are increasing work site enforcement, we are deploying
fences and advanced technologies to stop illegal crossings, we have
effectively ended the policy of  "catch and release" at the border,
and by the end of this year, we will have doubled the number of border
patrol agents. Yet we also need to acknowledge that we will never
fully secure our border until we create a lawful way for foreign
workers to come here and support our economy. This will take pressure
off the border and allow law enforcement to concentrate on those who
mean us harm. We must also find a sensible and humane way to deal with
people here illegally. Illegal immigration is complicated, but it can
be resolved. And it must be resolved in a way that upholds both our
laws and our highest ideals.


This is the business of our nation here at home. Yet building a
prosperous future for our citizens also depends on confronting enemies
abroad and advancing liberty in troubled regions of the world.


Our foreign policy is based on a clear premise: We trust that people,
when given the chance, will choose a future of freedom and peace. In
the last seven years, we have witnessed stirring moments in the
history of liberty. We have seen citizens in Georgia and Ukraine stand
up for their right to free and fair elections. We have seen people in
Lebanon take to the streets to demand their independence. We have seen
Afghans emerge from the tyranny of the Taliban to choose a new
president and a new parliament. We have seen jubilant Iraqis holding
up ink-stained fingers and celebrating their freedom. And these images
of liberty have inspired us.


In the past seven years, we have also seen images that have sobered
us. We have watched throngs of mourners in Lebanon and Pakistan
carrying the caskets of beloved leaders taken by the assassin's
hand. We have seen wedding guests in blood-soaked finery staggering
from a hotel in Jordan, Afghans and Iraqis blown up in mosques and
markets, and trains in London and Madrid ripped apart by bombs. And on
a clear September day, we saw thousands of our fellow citizens taken
from us in an instant. These horrific images serve as a grim reminder:
The advance of liberty is opposed by terrorists and extremists -
evil men who despise freedom, despise America, and aim to subject
millions to their violent rule.


Since September 11, we have taken the fight to these terrorists and
extremists. We will stay on the offense, we will keep up the pressure,
and we will deliver justice to the enemies of America.


We are engaged in the defining ideological struggle of the 21st
century. The terrorists oppose every principle of humanity and decency
that we hold dear. Yet in this war on terror, there is one thing we
and our enemies agree on: In the long run, men and women who are free
to determine their own destinies will reject terror and refuse to live
in tyranny. That is why the terrorists are fighting to deny this
choice to people in Lebanon,


Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the Palestinian Territories. And that
is why, for the security of America and the peace of the world, we are
spreading the hope of freedom.


In Afghanistan, America, our 25 NATO allies, and 15 partner nations
are helping the Afghan people defend their freedom and rebuild their
country. Thanks to the courage of these military and civilian
personnel, a nation that was once a safe haven for Al Qaeda is now a
young democracy where boys and girls are going to school, new roads
and hospitals are being built, and people are looking to the future
with new hope. These successes must continue, so we are adding 3,200
Marines to our forces in Afghanistan, where they will fight the
terrorists and train the Afghan Army and police. Defeating the Taliban
and Al Qaeda is critical to our security, and I thank the Congress for
supporting America's vital mission in Afghanistan.


In Iraq, the terrorists and extremists are fighting to deny a proud
people their liberty and to establish safe havens for attacks across
the world. One year ago, our enemies were succeeding in their efforts
to plunge Iraq into chaos. So we reviewed our strategy and changed
course. We launched a surge of American forces into Iraq. And we gave
our troops a new mission: Work with Iraqi forces to protect the Iraqi
people, pursue the enemy in its strongholds, and deny the terrorists
sanctuary anywhere in the country.


The Iraqi people quickly realized that something dramatic had
happened. Those who had worried that America was preparing to abandon
them instead saw tens of thousands of American forces flowing into
their country. They saw our forces moving into neighborhoods, clearing
out the terrorists, and staying behind to ensure the enemy did not
return. And they saw our troops, along with provincial reconstruction
teams that include foreign service officers and other skilled public
servants, coming in to ensure that improved security was followed by
improvements in daily life. Our military and civilians in Iraq are
performing with courage and distinction, and they have the gratitude
of our whole nation.


The Iraqis launched a surge of their own. In the fall of 2006, Sunni
tribal leaders grew tired of Al Qaeda's brutality and started a
popular uprising called "the Anbar Awakening." Over the past year,
similar movements have spread across the country. And today, this
grass-roots surge includes more than 80,000 Iraqi citizens who are
fighting the terrorists. The government in Baghdad has stepped forward
as well, adding more than 100,000 new Iraqi soldiers and police
during the past year.


While the enemy is still dangerous and more work remains, the American
and Iraqi surges have achieved results few of us could have imagined
just one year ago:


When we met last year, many said containing the violence was
impossible. A year later, high profile terrorist attacks are down,
civilian deaths are down, and sectarian killings are down.


When we met last year, militia extremists - some armed and trained
by Iran - were wreaking havoc in large areas of Iraq. A year later,
coalition and Iraqi forces have killed or captured hundreds of militia
fighters. And Iraqis of all backgrounds increasingly realize that
defeating these militia fighters is critical to the future of their
country.


When we met last year, Al Qaeda had sanctuaries in many areas of Iraq,
and their leaders had just offered American forces safe passage out of
the country. Today, it is Al Qaeda that is searching for safe
passage. They have been driven from many of the strongholds they once
held, and over the past year, we have captured or killed thousands of
extremists in Iraq, including hundreds of key Al Qaeda leaders and
operatives. Last month, Osama bin Laden released a tape in which he
railed against Iraqi tribal leaders who have turned on Al Qaeda and
admitted that Coalition forces are growing stronger in Iraq. Ladies
and gentlemen, some may deny the surge is working, but among the
terrorists there is no doubt. Al Qaeda is on the run in Iraq, and this
enemy will be defeated.


When we met last year, our troop levels in Iraq were on the
rise. Today, because of the progress just described, we are
implementing a policy of "return on success," and the surge forces
we sent to Iraq are beginning to come home.


This progress is a credit to the valor of our troops and the
brilliance of their commanders. This evening, I want to speak directly
to our men and women on the front lines. Soldiers, sailors, airmen,
marines, and coast guardsmen: In the past year, you have done
everything we have asked of you, and more. Our nation is grateful for
your courage. We are proud of your accomplishments. And tonight in
this hallowed chamber, with the American people as our witness, we
make you a solemn pledge: In the fight ahead, you will have all you
need to protect our nation. And I ask the Congress to meet its
responsibilities to these brave men and women by fully funding our
troops.


Our enemies in Iraq have been hit hard. They are not yet defeated, and
we can still expect tough fighting ahead. Our objective in the coming
year is to sustain and build on the gains we made in 2007, while
transitioning to the next phase of our strategy. American troops are
shifting from leading operations, to partnering with Iraqi forces,
and, eventually, to a protective overwatch mission. As part of this
transition, one Army brigade combat team and one Marine Expeditionary
Unit have already come home and will not be replaced. In the coming
months, four additional brigades and two Marine battalions will follow
suit. Taken together, this means more than 20,000 of our troops are
coming home.


Any further drawdown of U.S. troops will be based on conditions in
Iraq and the recommendations of our commanders. General Petraeus has
warned that too fast a drawdown could result in the "disintegration
of the Iraqi Security Forces, Al Qaeda-Iraq regaining lost ground,
[and] a marked increase in violence." Members of Congress: Having
come so far and achieved so much, we must not allow this to happen.


In the coming year, we will work with Iraqi leaders as they build on
the progress they are making toward political reconciliation. At the
local level, Sunnis, Shia and Kurds are beginning to come together to
reclaim their communities and rebuild their lives. Progress in the
provinces must be matched by progress in Baghdad. And we are seeing
some encouraging signs. The national government is sharing oil
revenues with the provinces. The parliament recently passed both a
pension law and de-Baathification reform. Now they are debating a
provincial powers law. The Iraqis still have a distance to travel. But
after decades of dictatorship and the pain of sectarian violence,
reconciliation is taking place - and the Iraqi people are taking
control of their future.


The mission in Iraq has been difficult and trying for our nation. But
it is in the vital interest of the United States that we succeed. A
free Iraq will deny Al Qaeda a safe haven. A free Iraq will show
millions across the Middle East that a future of liberty is
possible. And a free Iraq will be a friend of America, a partner in
fighting terror, and a source of stability in a dangerous part of the
world.


By contrast, a failed Iraq would embolden extremists, strengthen Iran,
and give terrorists a base from which to launch new attacks on our
friends, our allies, and our homeland. The enemy has made its
intentions clear. At a time when the momentum seemed to favor them, Al
Qaeda's top commander in Iraq declared that they will not rest until
they have attacked us here in Washington. My fellow Americans: We will
not rest either. We will not rest until this enemy has been
defeated. We must do the difficult work today, so that years from now
people will look back and say that this generation rose to the moment,
prevailed in a tough fight, and left behind a more hopeful region and
a safer America.


We are also standing against the forces of extremism in the Holy Land,
where we have new cause for hope. Palestinians have elected a
president who recognizes that confronting terror is essential to
achieving a state where his people can live in dignity and at peace
with Israel. Israelis have leaders who recognize that a peaceful,
democratic Palestinian state will be a source of lasting
security. This month in Ramallah and Jerusalem, I assured leaders from
both sides that America will do, and I will do, everything we can to
help them achieve a peace agreement that defines a Palestinian state
by the end of this year. The time has come for a Holy Land where a
democratic Israel and a democratic Palestine live side-by-side in
peace.


We are also standing against the forces of extremism embodied by the
regime in Tehran. Iran's rulers oppress a good and talented
people. And wherever freedom advances in the Middle East, it seems the
Iranian regime is there to oppose it. Iran is funding and training
militia groups in Iraq, supporting Hezbollah terrorists in Lebanon,
and backing Hamas' efforts to undermine peace in the Holy
Land. Tehran is also developing ballistic missiles of increasing range
and continues to develop its capability to enrich uranium, which could
be used to create a nuclear weapon. Our message to the people of Iran
is clear: We have no quarrel with you, we respect your traditions and
your history, and we look forward to the day when you have your
freedom. Our message to the leaders of Iran is also clear: Verifiably
suspend your nuclear enrichment, so negotiations can begin. And to
rejoin the community of nations, come clean about your nuclear
intentions and past actions, stop your oppression at home, and cease
your support for terror abroad. But above all, know this: America will
confront those who threaten our troops, we will stand by our allies,
and we will defend our vital interests in the Persian Gulf.


On the home front, we will continue to take every lawful and effective
measure to protect our country. This is our most solemn duty. We are
grateful that there has not been another attack on our soil since
September 11. This is not for a lack of desire or effort on the part
of the enemy. In the past six years, we have stopped numerous attacks,
including a plot to fly a plane into the tallest building in Los
Angeles and another to blow up passenger jets bound for America over
the Atlantic. Dedicated men and women in our government toil day and
night to stop the terrorists from carrying out their plans. These good
citizens are saving American lives, and everyone in this chamber owes
them our thanks. And we owe them something more: We owe them the tools
they need to keep our people safe.


One of the most important tools we can give them is the ability to
monitor terrorist communications. To protect America, we need to know
who the terrorists are talking to, what they are saying, and what they
are planning. Last year, the Congress passed legislation to help us do
that. Unfortunately, the Congress set the legislation to expire on
February 1. This means that if you do not act by Friday, our ability
to track terrorist threats would be weakened and our citizens will be
in greater danger. The Congress must ensure the flow of vital
intelligence is not disrupted. The Congress must pass liability
protection for companies believed to have assisted in the efforts to
defend America. We have had ample time for debate. The time to act is
now.


Protecting our nation from the dangers of a new century requires more
than good intelligence and a strong military. It also requires
changing the conditions that breed resentment and allow extremists to
prey on despair. So America is using its influence to build a freer,
more hopeful, and more compassionate world. This is a reflection of
our national interest and the calling of our conscience.


America is opposing genocide in Sudan and supporting freedom in
countries from Cuba and Zimbabwe to Belarus and Burma.


America is leading the fight against global poverty, with strong
education initiatives and humanitarian assistance. We have also
changed the way we deliver aid by launching the Millennium Challenge
Account. This program strengthens democracy, transparency, and the
rule of law in developing nations, and I ask you to fully fund this
important initiative.


America is leading the fight against global hunger. Today, more than
half the world's food aid comes from the United States. And tonight, I
ask the Congress to support an innovative proposal to provide food
assistance by purchasing crops directly from farmers in the developing
world, so we can build up local agriculture and help break the cycle
of famine.


America is leading the fight against disease. With your help, we are
working to cut by half the number of malaria-related deaths in 15
African nations. And our Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief is treating
1.4 million people. We can bring healing and hope to many more. So I
ask you to maintain the principles that have changed behavior and made
this program a success. And I call on you to double our initial
commitment to fighting HIV/AIDS by approving an additional $30 billion
over the next 5 years.


America is a force for hope in the world because we are a
compassionate people, and some of the most compassionate Americans are
those who have stepped forward to protect us. We must keep faith with
all who have risked life and limb so that we might live in freedom and
peace. Over the past seven years, we have increased funding for
veterans by more than 95 percent. As we increase funding, we must also
reform our veterans system to meet the needs of a new war and a new
generation. I call on the Congress to enact the reforms recommended by
Senator Bob Dole and Secretary Donna Shalala, so we can improve the
system of care for our wounded warriors and help them build lives of
hope, promise, and dignity.


Our military families also sacrifice for America. They endure
sleepless nights and the daily struggle of providing for children
while a loved one is serving far from home. We have a responsibility
to provide for them. So I ask you to join me in expanding their access
to child care, creating new hiring preferences for military spouses
across the federal government, and allowing our troops to transfer
their unused education benefits to their spouses or children. Our
military families serve our nation, they inspire our nation, and
tonight our nation honors them.


The secret of our strength, the miracle of America, is that our
greatness lies not in our government, but in the spirit and
determination of our people. When the Federal Convention met in
Philadelphia in 1787, our nation was bound by the Articles of
Confederation, which began with the words, We the undersigned
delegates. When Govenor Morris was asked to draft the preamble to
our new Constitution, he offered an important revision and opened with
words that changed the course of our nation and the history of the
world: "We the people"


By trusting the people, our Founders wagered that a great and noble
nation could be built on the liberty that resides in the hearts of all
men and women. By trusting the people, succeeding generations
transformed our fragile young democracy into the most powerful nation
on earth and a beacon of hope for millions. And so long as we continue
to trust the people, our nation will prosper, our liberty will be
secure, and the State of our Union will remain strong. So tonight,
with confidence in freedom power, and trust in the people, let us set
forth to do their business.
